For all those interested in one way or another in studying the "Philosophy of the Common Cause" and everything that is currently connected with Nikolai Fyodorovich Fyodorov, it was a great joy to learn that by the thirtieth anniversary of his death, all such work in the future can be carried out not only by private initiative and guerrilla warfare, but there is an opportunity to connect it with a very authoritative institution. We are referring to the opening at the literary archive of the Czech National Museum in Prague [1], along with the department that sets itself the task of studying questions related to the writings and personality of L. N. Tolstoy, another special department with the same tasks in relation to the "Philosophy of the Common Cause" and N. F. Fyodorov. This department was named Fedoroviana Prahensia.

This event is all the more welcome because the formation of this institution took place at the Museum. The profound and greatest appreciation that N. F. Fedorov gave to museums and their work is well known. He considered museum work to be a sacred beginning to the work of resurrection, the initial moment of preserving relics, on the basis of which a search for everything connected with the face of the deceased should be carried out in the future, which will allow one to individually recognize and recreate, as the first step to the general work of resurrection, his image in all its concreteness and uniqueness. One of N. F. Fedorov's articles, included in the first volume of his works, is entitled "Painting the external walls of a church where a museum or library is located." The initiative to establish a department at the National Museum dedicated to N. F. Fedorov belonged to Dr. Novotny1, head of the manuscripts and archival materials department of the Museum, and Mr. K. A. Chkheidze; It arose at the beginning of 1933 and in March-May it began to take on concrete outlines. The establishment of Fedoroviana Prahensia took place by order of the Director of the Czech National Museum, Dr. Josef Wolf2, after which, on behalf of the newly formed institution, messages were sent to a number of people asking for cooperation. It was noted that the Directorate of the National Museum, in opening the said department, was guided by the presence of “a widespread and ever-growing interest in this thinker” and strives to “preserve the memory of the outstanding Russian cultural worker N.F. Fedorov, who, as a champion of the idea of ​​Slavic unity, is equally close to every Slavic people, and as a museum figure is especially dear to our institution” 3.

The first and now especially urgent task of Fedoroviana Prahensia is the collection and unification of everything that was written and published both by N.F. Fedorov himself and what is being written and was written about him, as well as the storage of various kinds of materials, both about the author of the Philosophy of the Common Cause himself, and about people who, to one degree or another, connected their lives and work with his ideas.

At present, along with the main publications related to the philosophy of the common cause, Fedoroviana Prahensia has, among other things, one of the few copies of the first issue of the collection "Universal Cause" in circulation. In addition, it contains a significant number of manuscripts, letters, publications and articles related to the movement associated with the ideas of N. F. Fedorov. In particular, it has at its disposal the manuscripts of the most important publications dedicated to N. F. Fedorov, published abroad, copies of some of his manuscripts and letters, intended for publication in the form of the third volume of the Philosophy of the Common Cause, very rare and the only photographs of him on his deathbed [2]. In addition, it contains the correspondence and letters of a number of people currently engaged in the dissemination of Fedorov's ideas, both Russian and foreign4.

Fedoroviana Prahensia, in addition to collecting the above materials, planned to organize an exhibition dedicated to N. F. Fedorov (in connection with the thirtieth anniversary of his death)5. It can be assumed that this new institution will not be limited to collecting Fedorov materials, but will turn into a center for the study and unification of all currently disparate individuals working to implement the ideas of the "Philosophy of the Common Cause" in all countries of the world.
NOTES

Published from: Vselenskoe Delo. Vol. 2. Pp. 176-177.

The article about the opening of the Fedoroviana Pragensia archival collection at the National Museum in Prague, created on the initiative of K. A. Chkheidze, was written by N. A. Setnitsky. It was placed under the pseudonym "O. D-a" (can be deciphered as "Olga Dubyaga" - this was the name of N. A. Setnitsky's wife before marriage).

For more information about the Prague Fedoroviana, see the selection “From the History of Fedoroviana Pragensia” and notes to it in this book.

1 Miloslav Novotny (1894-1966) was a Czech literary historian and literary critic, editor of the journal “Rozhledy po literatuře a umĕni”. From 1924, he was a librarian at the Czechoslovak National Museum, then head of the manuscripts and archival materials department.

2 Josef Wolf (1878-1937) was a Czech historian and bibliographer, director of the Czechoslovak National Museum.

3 The full text of the Czechoslovak National Museum’s appeal to individuals and organizations regarding the opening of the Fedoroviana Pragens archival collection ia from May 22, 1933 see below in the collection "From the history of Fedoroviana Pragensia".

4 Documents concerning N.F. Fedorov and the activities of his followers in Moscow and Harbin were transferred to the National Museum by N.A. Setnitsky, as for epistolary materials and books, some of them were transferred to the Museum by N.A. Setnitsky, and some by K.A. Chkheidze.

5 See the preamble to the notes to the collection "From the history of Fedoroviana Pragensia".