Although Richlianism itself considers itself anti-dogmatic, nevertheless, the very fact of assigning it the name "School of Richlian Theology in Lutheranism" relates this teaching not to the deed, but to school knowledge, to teaching, i.e. to immaturity. <<1>> Teaching for adults should become a project of the deed, a common deed, which is the fulfillment of the project. Richl does not consider religion knowledge and rejects dogmas instead of turning them into commandments. By this he limits morality to such deeds that do not eradicate evil, but only weaken it.

Ritschl defines the "Kingdom of God"2>> as "a correlate of love, since it represents a society of Christ's disciples united by love in order to realize spiritual and moral goals." But this plural number alone shows that Ritschl is completely unaware of a single goal that is capable of uniting everyone if it includes all deeds. He does not at all understand that redemption is this common cause, the cause of all the living to restore life to all the dead, the cause of all sons to restore life to all fathers, the cause of all rational beings to transform the blind force of nature into one controlled by reason.<<3"

Ritschl's concept of God, it is true, also comes down to the concept of love; but love, from his point of view, is "a constant will which, with the consciousness of the real value of an object equal to me, is directed toward this object and perceives its end in itself as its own end in itself."

Schopenhauer views the world as will and as representation; it is more correct, however, to see bondage in the world, and then the idea will be a project of liberation from bondage. According to Ritschl, God is love as will, and Revelation is a manifestation of the divine will, expressed in the arrangement, in the establishment of the Kingdom of God on earth, and humanity, as the Kingdom of God, will apparently be a manifestation of will as love. <<4>>

In 1874, Ritschl published a large work, as a supplement to his main work, "On Justification": "Schleiermacher's Speeches and Their Impact on the Evangelical Church in Germany." <<5>> In Schleiermacher, Ritschl sees a mixture of paganism and Christianity. Defining religion as a product of artistic mood, Schleiermacher comes close to paganism; introducing mediation between God and man into his teaching on religion, Schleiermacher comes close to Christianity.

In 1875, "Instruction in the Christian Religion" was published. (In 1890, the 4th edition.) This short catechism or summary of Ritschl's large work "On Justification" consists of a short introduction (§§ 1-4) and 4 parts: 1. On the Kingdom of God (5-25); 2. On redemption (i.e., the establishment of the Kingdom of God) (26-45); 3. The doctrine of Christian life (46-77); 4. The doctrine of public worship of God (78-90). To place the Kingdom of God in the beginning, to turn redemption into the establishment of the Kingdom of God - means to take the right path. By public worship of God is meant, of course, public worship, i.e., temple life, and by Christian life - life outside the temple. But what does the latter lead to?

Not only Catholicism, but also Protestantism is increasingly and fatally drawn into socialism, contrary to the Protestant principle of free inquiry. Both the Orthodox and the Richlians are adopting socialism: the latter see in it the realization of the Kingdom of God on earth. Thus both Catholicism and Protestantism identify the question of poverty and wealth with, one might say, the very essence of religion. The opponents of the socialization of religion want to exclude material misfortunes from its sphere and limit it only to moral misfortunes; but by this they only further limit the work of religion. True religion and real liberation from misfortune demand the replacement of the question of wealth and poverty, or socialism, by the question of death and life; they demand the replacement of universal enrichment by universal resurrection. This solution to the problem is fundamental and the only real one. But how far from it is Richlianism!.. It, like Tolstoyism, in its ostentatious teaching wants to establish brotherhood (the Kingdom of God) by words alone, preaching, eloquence, without paying attention to the causes of non-brotherhood and without indicating active means for eliminating them. Richl defines the Kingdom of God as a gathering of believers in Christ, insofar as they act in accordance with the principle of love. The Kingdom of God, therefore, is the ideal of happiness attainable on earth, realized through the moral activity of all members of society, inspired by the principle of universal love. Representing a necessary tendency of divine love. The Kingdom of God is at the same time realized by man. This Kingdom of God, internally experienced by man in the collective union of all believers, forms the church. But the church is built here on principles derived not from “heaven,” but from “down,” on the value of phenomena (even if moral ones), and not entities, on the value of known (moral and social) manifestations of being, and not on the value of life itself, of being itself.

However, it is not easy to reveal this substitution of absolute value for relative value in Richl, due to the moral coloring of his teaching on values, which captivates the reader’s sympathies. In the area of ​​judgments, he recognizes, according to Lotze, precisely the judgments of value (Werturtheile) as the most essential, in other words: recognizes knowledge as valid only insofar as it serves as an expression of the practical side of the human spirit. Ritschl replaces the capricious impulses of feeling with the strict dictates of the will—or, more precisely, with the demands of practical reason. According to Ritschl, in religion, too, the essential is its morality. If, he says, paganism sought to make ethics dependent on cosmology, then the distinctive feature of Christianity is the desire to subordinate cosmology to the moral conception of the universe. Excellent!—we will remark to this, for if the word “subordinate” is understood not metaphorically but really, then here we shall have theurgy, “divinity” through the human race or races (series of generations). Knowledge thus acquires value for us in accordance with its influence on our life. Let us, however, think more deeply not about this goal, but about this assessment. If Ritschl recognizes morality as the most essential thing in religion, and this is in accordance with the demands of practical reason, narrowly practical, opposed to broad theoretical reason, as Kant understood it, then this means that Ritschl replaces the all-encompassing problem of being itself or of things in themselves with a particular problem of the phenomena of being and their relationship to man as a moral, i.e., active personality; the absolute, therefore, gives way to the relative. But the absolute cannot flow from the relative, and to reduce the entire worldview and life outlook only to the practical (even if moral) relationships of people to each other means to skim only the surface of the question of evil, ignoring its depth. This means speaking of the consequences, and not of the causes of the disorder in the world and in humanity itself, for the causes lie deeper: they are not in the relations of people to each other, but in the relations of nature to people and people to nature; and rising still higher, they are in the discrepancy between these relations and the will of God Himself. Consequently, without the instruction of ethics, moral teaching, in the closest connection with world doctrine and world knowledge (with physics, with cosmology, with astronomy, in a word - with science), and world doctrine - with theology and knowledge of God (with religion), the value of ethics itself is correspondingly lowered; the separation of one from the other, and even more so their opposition to each other, distorts ethics, depriving it of an absolute principle, turning it into superficial and conditional rules of personal interpersonal relations, at the basis of which only inessential utilitarian motives will be placed. Richlianism opposes ethics to dogmatics, whereas between them there can and should exist complete unity.

By reducing the whole essence of religion to ethics, — whereas all ethics should be raised to the breadth and height of dogmatics, believing moral perfection in unification in the likeness of the Triune God in the matter of the universal return of life, as the accomplishment of redemption, — Richl's follower Kaftan accuses the Eastern Church of creating dogmatics under the influence of pagan philosophy, and in Protestantism and rationalism he sees the destruction of dogmatics, i.e. the purification of Christianity. In fact, the Eastern Church, Greco-Russian, in the person of the Greeks developed the theory of dogmatics, and in the person of Russia it must transform this theory into an equally significant universal ethics. Protestantism and rationalism or Western criticism destroyed dogmatics, reduced ethics to the emptiness of personal relationships, so that Protestantism would be, in Hermann's words, the gravedigger of Christianity, if only it could die.<<6>>

1 The Richlian anti-philosophical, anti-dogmatic, anti-scientific school: it knows science only as a class science, i.e. as knowledge without action, which is what science really is at the present time. For Richl, religion and science are two completely different and even the most opposite spheres: in one, reason dominates, in the other, feeling. He calls feeling "self-judgment of the human spirit", since all forces (mind, heart, will) participate in the religious process. Instead of uniting dogmatics and ethics, dogma and commandment, Richl, in the name of narrow ethics, denied the breadth of dogmatics.

2 The Kingdom of God, limited to the living, is immanent for Ritschl, while the kingdom of all generations, i.e. resurrection, is transcendent.

3 For Ritschl, the church, or the Kingdom of God, is a gathering of believers, insofar as they act in accordance with the principle of love. This is the ideal of happiness attainable (?) on earth, realized through moral activity. Having recognized the church, the Kingdom of God, as a gathering or association of only the living, and not for the Resurrection of the dead, but for the happiness of the living, Ritschl had only one thing left to do: recognize socialism.

4 In Ritschl's last work, published after his death (in 1890), "Fides implicita", it is said that faith from the Protestant point of view is hope, and therefore, in contrast to the Catholic view, belongs to the sphere of the will.

5 Schleiermacher, according to Ritschl, laid the foundation for several trends in Lutheranism: pietistic, which shared an aesthetic or romantic view of religion, rationalistic (mythical school), “which, seeing in religion in the embodiment of the ideal-beautiful, relates its entire historical-dogmatic element to the realm of myths, and, finally, to the confessional-political (new Lutheran school)”, which sees the only salvation of Lutheranism in the establishment of an external-legal form.

6 F. Luther called Richlian theology in the form of a scientific system “the religious disease of our century”, and Pfleiderer noted that this “theology, closely adhering to the views of Feuerbach and Darwin”, conceals within itself “conclusions of the saddest nature”.