Together, inseparably with a feeling, with the recognition of his “I”, the son of “I”, “another” or “others”, not alien to him, is given, and his relatives “I” are fatherly. Only with the death of the "native self" do we begin to recognize the existence of a non-native, alien, hostile "non-I", as the forces of negative, deadly. On the contrary, the “native self” who has left for inevitably is felt, it is necessary as a reason, as a “great native self” preceding us, but no longer lonely, as my personal “I” if I separated myself from them, and connected with others, the same “I”, over which “non-I” has no strength. This is the immortal Trinity, because the son and daughter are not separated from the father, they remain in the ranges and primitives, in a word and spirit.

The judgments of both Schelling and his opponent Jacobi are the judgment of the prodigal sons who were separated from the fathers; They do not know the difference between the “others”, “native self” and the “non-me-i”, the embodiment of a blind, deadly force, because for them everything is “non-I”, that is, everything has become stranger and there is nothing more than native. This is the philosophy of not sons, but citizens who are guarded against each other, on a military, and not at the brotherly position of those who are.

It is necessary to live a second time, you need to live, but do not develop, do not survive the state of pure childbirth in order to understand the deep difference of the "other" I ", from the" alien non-I "to become a true fan of the Blessed Trinity." Another I ", if it is accepted as a native to us, does not limit our being, while" non-I "believes the borders of our" I ", He constrains him, “I” (personal), connected by love with the “others, its own, the kingdom of life, the union of the sons of human;

Only the performance of the commandment "Be like children!" And it can create a teaching in which thought and feeling are mutually inseparable. On the contrary, the failure to fulfill this commandment led, as a punishment, to such a state, about which Tolstoy says: “It seemed to me that, besides me, there was nothing.” The “I” of philosophical terminology is only a replacement for the “son of deceased fathers”, that is, a replacement of kinship and mortality: the first - the words “man and humanity”, and the second - abstract and vague concepts “finite, limited, temporary, etc.”. With this substitution, this fictional for the full, a gap between the philosophy of pure thinking and the philosophy of feelings and between philosophy and religion, which bears death for both sides, is created, but the death inevitable when oblivious is: “What God combined, that man will not be separated!”