The world, understood according to Schopenhauer as will (to being), but in reality remaining a bondage (to death), and therefore the world as representation (bondage to death) must become a project of return to being.

The world, understood according to Nietzsche as will striving for power,<<1>> but also as the world in reality, is a bondage to death; and therefore, the will, becoming power, must become a matter of return to life.

The world as representation without power and as a bondage to death will be an assumption of a constant, involuntary return to life, subordinated to death.

Finally, the world not as an abstract representation, but as a known reality, with the power to rationally direct it, will no longer be an assumption, but a project of return, unified, volitional and conscious.

For Nietzsche, “returns” remain a phenomenon, a transcendental fact, and not an immanent act (action). But why this is so is not clear to him, probably because when he speaks of the will striving for power, he forgets the theory of infinite returns (incompatible with the will), and when he speaks of the inevitability of the latter, he forgets the power of the will. And that is why he has the antinomy "entre l'éternel Devenir et l'éternel Revenir", according to Fouillier's beautiful paraphrase. "*1>> <<2"

The will to life, says Zarathustra, does not exist, for what does not exist cannot desire, and what lives cannot but desire life. Schopenhauer would have answered this without hesitation: what lives desires the continuation of life, desires also its return under all forms, and desires the growth of the consciousness of life. But, Nietzsche objects, the true principle is not the will to life, but the will to power, to domination. But to this, says Foulier, we in turn object: “Power is only one of the components of the complex totality of life,” “un simple extrait de la vie.” “Life itself has entrusted me with a secret,” says Zarathustra, “I am that which must always surpass itself.” “Poetically said, but empty words!” replies the French philosopher. “How can life surpass itself? By living more, by living better!” (“en vivant plus, en vivant mieux!”). But this is no longer a return that merely repeats the imperfect past, this is no longer a simple “revenir”; this is no longer a single repetition, but an improvement, quantitative (“live more!”) and qualitative (“live better!”), this is already a “devenir,” conscious, volitional, purposeful and laborious. These are not countless, fatal returns that do not depend on us, but a single return, created by our will and knowledge through the forces of nature, controlled by us.

But the "epigones" of philosophy, the Nietzscheans, faithful to the motto "know only yourself!" or, at most, "know only the living!", do not even enter their soulless heads the thought that the power (Macht) of people can be used to return life to our dead fathers. Nietzsche recognized our time as similar to the Alexandrian era, that is, the time preceding the appearance of Christianity: he was right and consistent when he spoke of the "excess of history", the excess of museums and cemeteries, that is, of the embodiment of passive, suffering history, containing within itself the dying of the human race. But he did not see active history at all. He knew history only as it is, as a fact, and not as it should become, as a project of what should be. And he knew the museum only as it is, and not as what it should be, as an institution preserving the memory of the dead and restoring the strength and means for their return. Finally, he knew the cemetery only in its present form, as a place of decay and oblivion, and not in its proper form, not as a place of re-creation, of the reunion of the living with the dead, not as a place of resurrection.

Without thinking about the duty of a single and final return, the pessimistic philosopher consoled, or rather intoxicated himself with hopes for temporary replacements of one transitory form or one temporary type of life by others. "When," he says, "the power of Dionysus (he is also the Antichrist. Preface to the 2nd edition of "On the Origin of Tragedy", p. 20 of the Russian translation) grows too much, which is what we are experiencing at the present time, then Apollo, hidden in the clouds, must certainly descend to us on earth; and, of course, the generation that follows us will see the manifestation of Apollo's beauty in the most luxurious forms and experience its effect on itself." Will the prophecy of the false prophet, predicted back in 1871, come true? It is possible to believe that the time of the Socratic man (the follower of Socrates), devoting himself to knowledge without doing anything, has passed; but to believe in the revival of tragedy in the spirit of Dionysus and to accompany the solemn procession of the "divine Hop" - Dionysus, going from India to Greece (Europe) is impossible. The Alexandrian era, although similar to ours, ended, however, not with the restoration of the cult of Dionysus and Apollo, but with the appearance of Christianity. Not one image, not a likeness alone can satisfy a person: art, like science - nothing more than means, capable, with a certain attitude towards them, of contributing to salvation; for salvation one must turn to life itself. If crime, suffering and death come from the spirit of intoxication and lust, under the influence of which only appearance, only seeming deliver enjoyment, we must desire the sobriety of humanity from the destructive Intoxication (Bacchus, Dionysus), we must lead people to sobriety, and not to intoxication, even with artistic, even beautiful in appearance dreams.

1 But why is the will, striving for power, limited to domination over its own kind, and does not become power over the blind force of nature?

2 Kuno-Fischer, the greatest commentator and popularizer of philosophy (contrary to another famous German professor Windelband, who asserted that "philosophy cannot be presented popularly"), undertook to explain the doctrine that dominated in the first half of the 19th century, and was refuted in the second, the doctrine of constant, continuous becoming (L'éternel devenir). But when the old teaching appeared, the teaching of endless returns (revenir), accomplished by a blind force apart from rational force, the teaching not of an active and not of a conscious return, but of passive repetitions of the past, did Kuno-Fischer then pay attention to the appearance of "Zarathushtra", the teacher of eternal returns, this "revenir", which constitutes an antinomy to Hegel's "devenir"?..

*1 Between infinite becoming and infinite return (Fr.).