If our moralist had understood that before striving one must be born, then the striving for power would have received a goal; for even he understood that the birth of sons is already the beginning of the death of the fathers; and from this naturally follows the duty of the united sons to restore life to the fathers, and consequently there also appears the striving for power, but, of course, over the force that gives birth and kills, and not over one's own kind; because in the latter case the so-called "culture" with its "development of a higher type" of the notorious "superman" would be the development of a type of rapist, the development of a handful of masters over a herd of weak and spineless slaves, so humiliated and downtrodden that they would consider it a great honor for themselves to be in slavery to such masters.

A note in the margin: "As long as there is death, there will also be poverty," for slavery is a necessary condition of "culture." Until, therefore, culture is replaced by "recreation," that is, by complete recreation, the question of poverty and wealth will not be out of the running in the struggle of life, will not be abolished, for it is, in essence, a question of death and life.

By recognizing themselves as sons, men have already recognized their fathers and could not help but recognize them. Thus, even without desire, there is a consciousness of kinship, of unity; but this unity is still without love; it is natural, but not yet moral. What absurd chatter must appear all the disputes about the freedom of the individual (on the one hand) and about the bridle, the collar, the yoke of duty, on the other, when the voluntary unity of love of moral individuals in the consciousness of themselves as brothers by fathers for the fulfillment of a common duty to the latter will replace the weak-willed unity of individuals who are related by nature, but have forgotten this duty, and of the same natural duty! How empty and superfluous will all these words and speeches become when the egocentric life and worldview is replaced by a pananthropocentric one! What kind of command can there be in the relations of fathers and sons (or what "declarations of rights" and "guarantees of freedom" between them are possible against each other), when they are with each other, or rather in each other, according to the model of the closest and freest, most loving kinship unity of the persons of the Holy Trinity? All the disputes of the Nietzschean and Kantian scholars and their pale reflection in our person in the persons of Messrs. Mikhailovsky and Nevedomsky are they not, from this point of view, pitiful, the greatest idle talk and empty talk!

The father is not a master, the son is not a slave, not a hireling - this is the deepest foundation on which the Gospel is built, that is, on the unity of sons and fathers, on a unity whose weak expression is found in the beatitudes, which alone are accessible from the entire Gospel, and even then only in a distorted form, to our moralists like Tolstoy.

Of all the prodigal sons, the most prodigal is undoubtedly Nietzsche! He tore out of his soul everything filial. Having performed this operation, he could safely utter the musty, thoroughly rotten words: "You must become what you are." But who are you if not a prodigal son who has renounced his fathers, who are you - Ham and Hamit?

And yet this fig tree, dried up to the very roots, still thinks to bear fruit! The ripe fruit of this Tree of Death is the supreme individual, equal only to himself, autonomous in his behavior, a super-moral man, guided by his own will alone, but from this point of view containing nothing definite in himself except the desire to rule. This arrogant superman has no business thinking about a community of convictions and actions with people whom he considers a “despicable herd”; he can only associate with ambitious and power-hungry people like himself. But what kind of society, one wonders, could they form, except perhaps a gang of robbers and plunderers living at the expense of those whom they oppress and despise? But even then the doubt arises again: will even two such bears be able to live in the same den? And what will they do with their equals, whom they “must necessarily respect,” and with those inferior to themselves, whom they “are just as necessarily ready to trample underfoot”?..