Jean Finot's article "For the Loves of Death" (Religion of Mort), which is part of the work "Philosophy of Longevity" that is being prepared for publication, contains an amazing contradiction, which the author does not notice. Finot does not hide the fact that, wanting to convince readers that death is not evil, he aims to free them from the fear of death, which shortens life: if, the author says, people did not crush their strength with grief about their impending death and fear of death, they could live, perhaps, for two hundred years.

The question arises: if death is not evil, then why get rid of it? Is this not hypocrisy or empty talk? <<1>> By proving that death is not evil, the author proves only that life is good. If we admit that death is not evil and life is good, then this good must be greater than zero and less than infinity, which is, of course, too vague; but we must remember that for now we know life as it has been and is, and not as it should be. Let us admit (however difficult it may be to admit) that death is not evil. But how can we separate it from everything that causes pain and loss, that reduces strength, abilities, and kills life? He who does not recognize death as evil must recognize nothing as evil, except perhaps life. This is what Buddhism believes, quite consistently from this point of view. But the Parisian author is far from such a pessimistic view of existence; he took up his pen in order to combat the annoying, nightmarish phantom that disturbs "la joie de vivre."*1>> It must be dispelled somehow! But this is not done very successfully: the author, although he reproaches everyone for thinking little about the true meaning of death, himself admits the incomprehensibility of this phenomenon, which for some reason he calls causeless. In his capacity as editor of the Revue des Revues, he places his supposedly encouraging thoughts as an "article de circonstance,"<<*2" very inopportunely, before the November commemoration of the dead. What is the point of all this lying? How and whom can one deceitfully console with it?..

For "consolation," the author resorts to the worn-out idea of ​​materialism. For insensitive nature, as well as for soulless philosophy, there is no difference between a molecule, a cell, and a man; a change in the first two is for the author completely identical with the death of the latter. How old, simple and… unconvincingly arbitrary it is!

Moreover! Our moral and intellectual I is (according to Finot) also a vast cemetery, where the successive layers of our consciences (“nos consciences consécutives”) rest. What of this? The past, the former, the living must undoubtedly lie and have lain in our moral and intellectual beginnings; but is it only a dead or forever dead heritage? Or, rather, is it “dust that will rise again”? All this is dead because man only passively perceived what was happening in him and outside of him; but all this will be dead only as long as people are only conscious and feeling, and not doing.

Instead of a courageous call to fight death, they childishly advise not to look at it, they evade a conscientious analysis of its causes and effects. Fino says nothing, for example, about death, mutually inflicted on each other: is it really not evil in “moral” beings too?.. And death, generated by malice, is it really not evil?.. On the one hand, attributing reason and feeling to nature, they naively ask whether nature could really inspire a person with a love of life if death were evil, they bring pretense to madness, inviting one to rejoice and “almost love death” at the thought of the emergence from it of new life in the person of corpse worms, and on the other hand, after speeches about moral consciousness, about the soul as the keeper of “successive layers of consciences,” they are silent about whether the loss of loved ones, relatives, and beloved ones is not evil, they do not utter a single word about how to reconcile love with death?!.

One can still somewhat understand the defense of death from the lips of a pessimist: after all, it is the last “hope of the hopeless.”<<2>> But an apology for death from the pen of Parisian boulevard cheerfulness! An apology for death, written with a view to the immortal enjoyment of those blessings of life which the Paris exhibition shows to the whole world as “la joie de vivre” and triumphs of progress!.. J. Finot’s article has once again proven beyond doubt that the class of learned scribblers has no right to exist, especially given their claim to be leaders and mentors of those whom they shamelessly look upon not even as “lesser brothers,” but as “the public,” as a reading flock.

1 In the same contradiction with himself as Finot, Tolstoy, rebelling against war, capital punishment, referring at the same time to the commandment “Thou shalt not kill!” and at the same time asserting that “death is a good thing.” — On this subject, the following note was found in the papers of N. F. Fedorov: “After looking through the newspaper issue, I counted five murders and thought, in agreement with Bryusov, repeating the words of Tolstoy, invariably faithful to his commandment “not to think” and assuring that “death is a good thing,” — how many wonderful things have happened in Moscow alone! And in the whole world, every minute, perhaps every second, such beautiful things happen; it would be even better if there were more wars and epidemics. How can one say that life is bad when there is so much that is good in it?! And the so-called goal of extermination, mutual devouring - what delights! "

2 "Il mio dolore era speranza ancor!" Leopardi. ["My sorrow was still hope!" Leopardi (Italian).]

*1 Joy of life (French).

*2 Article on the occasion (French).