Freedom without power over nature is the same as the liberation of peasants without land.

The name of the “philosophical age”, given to the XVIII century, in general, is true, because philosophy is the belonging of a minority, an imaginary occupation, without a real business. Philosophy is the thought of the townspeople who believed in freedom, but did not notice the dominance and oppression of nature over themselves. The peasants, more reasonable than the townspeople, do not understand freedom without land, and having the earth do not consider themselves free, but call bread "the gift of God." The townspeople do not understand that without power over the blind strength of nature, one cannot call themselves enlightened and is already completely ridiculous to call themselves free. A slave of blind power calls itself free! The Lisbon earthquake was not taught by the dumb XVIII century, although the earthquake is a scourge of the cities, or at least much more to the city than on villages. Hunger is also not considered cities for disaster; And this year, the year of the Great Thrschs (1902) in the old and new light, showed that since the time of the XVIII century and we, praised by our progress, have not yet learned anything in this regard.

To preach the slaves of blind power from reasonable creatures, to condemn people to tolerance and discord, to the enrichment of vices and absurdities - this is the age of majority for our time! .. Already in this is the purpose of life? ..

The ultimate goal of life is reasonable to become the initial cause of themselves and this is likened to the original reason, the divine root cause.

We are experiencing a critical, fatal time: we need to solve the issue of freedom! Will we really understand freedom in the sense of restricting power, that power that should unite everyone in the struggle against the blind strength of nature? We won’t understand that freedom without power over nature and without management is the same as the liberation of peasants without land? ..