Kant is an enemy of the cause in general and of the common cause in particular; he wants to bind everyone, to restrict everything, to put it within narrow limits. He has confined religion in a narrow prison, so that it has become idleness, has turned into something merely mental, imaginary, that is, into nothing. In morality he did not discern the great common cause; he has turned it into little affairs, like the question: “Is it permissible to accept an invitation to intemperance?” ... In knowledge, without comprehending unity, he has turned all experimental science into a slave of industrialism, producing objects of hostility, disunity; he did not even admit the possibility of transforming science into universal experience. Not knowing the inner unification based on mutual knowledge, he thought that the production of manufactured toys could unite people so much that they would not even fight. But the greatest evil caused by it is the bifurcation of reason, that is, the recognition of this bifurcation as eternal and irremovable. The knowing reason is doomed by it to ignorance, and the practical reason to act alone, that is, it is limited in its activity to personal affairs, trifles. The first lacks truth; the second lacks good.

[Meanwhile] the antinomy of practical reason is not a dogma, but only a question, a question of two murders, from which the duty of returning life flows. With the resolution of the antinomy of practical reason (the fulfillment of this duty), all four antinomies of theoretical reason or understanding are resolved.

The first, the most essential and fundamental of them, is the 3rd antinomy (according to Kant). Abstractly, that is, "scientifically" posed, this is the question of causes; concretely, in a human, popular, vital way, this is a question about parents; or else: abstractly, this is a question about phenomena, and concretely, about sons and daughters. The connection between phenomena, beings born, living with parents, with those dying or already dead is revealed, proven by the conversion of birth into recreation. Sons and daughters, as transient phenomena, can know their causes, that is, their parents, only by the act of recreation, through which they themselves become imperishable, immortal. Phenomena not only carry in themselves and on themselves the images of the causes that produced them, but these images, as their bearers grow stronger (grow) and as the originals weaken and die, become projects of restoration, recreation. All created things attain objectivity, phenomena become entities, self-conscious subjects, creating themselves, bearing in themselves all the conditions of existence (of course, only in their totality) when they become participants in the work of resurrection, that is, brothers. The series of resurrections, reaching up to the first-born and first-dead, also reaches up to the unborn and undying. There is no eternal death, and the elimination of temporary death is our business and our task, the task of theoretical and practical reason, as a single, undivided one.

The resolution of the 4th antinomy is a natural consequence of the resolution of the preceding, 3rd. The 4th antinomy reveals in an abstract way the contradiction between necessity, and specifically, vitality—slavery (of sentient and conscious beings) or the domination of an insentient and unconscious force over them—and freedom in life (real), freedom for which there is no special term in the abstract world, for so-called “ideal” freedom does not give domination over a (real) soulless force. Man, contrary to Rousseau, is born a slave and will wear chains until all, as conscious executors of the will of Divine Reason, turning the gift into labor, into the acquired and having atoned for the sin of involuntary displacement of parents by recreating them, become the culprits of the existence or re-existence of their parents and independent causes of their own, renewed existence.

The 4th antinomy, which poses the question of whether the world has a limit in space and an end in time, is resolved by the work of resurrection. The resurrecting sons and the resurrected parents, who contribute to the complete renewal of the being of their children, both of them, who have turned the all-consuming force of time into a reuniting force, both of them cannot have an end in time. And since they themselves become, in the fullness of knowledge, strength and love, the leaders, the regulators of nature, they also save the world from the end in time. Eternity is not measured by time… Dry positivism and callous criticism know only the previous and the subsequent in their disunity and even hostility. Only the most holy cause, resurrection, driven by all-embracing, kinship love, unites and unites the previous with the subsequent and, granting immortality to both, transforms the dying Past and the nascent Future into a continuously living, undying Present.

*1 The identical with the first edition of this article is omitted (V.A.K.).