Having given absolute significance to the tyranny of the "superman" in the world, it is easy for the illustrious Mr. Nietzsche to elevate to truth (which, incidentally, he does not recognize) everything that pleases him, and to reject what is not to his taste. He liked dominion (over his own kind, of course, and not over blind, deadly force), and so he extols it, elevates it to the fundamental principle. To every question "why?" he should have answered briefly and simply: "I want it that way!" But the nobleman, by his slavish nature, forgetting about his high rank of superman, condescends to proof. "Every living being: plant, animal, man" ... (he begins his argument, and, of course, does not begin from the beginning!) "strives to increase its strength and gain dominance" ... So be it! But our degenerate, having stolen this proposition from Darwin, forgot that before one can strive for anything one must be born; and to be born means to become a son, to appear first of all as a child, which already exists when sexual differences have not yet been revealed, when the vice of lust for power has not yet been born. The renegade of filial duty has forgotten that the son who loves his father precedes the lust for power.

“What!” our philosopher will say, remembering that he must play the effective role of the superman, “what! and I, the superman, must be born? And I—to acknowledge myself as the son of man?..” We, however, seeing the anger of such a high personage, hasten to reassure him that he can acknowledge himself as the son not of a German and a pastor, but of a Pole and a magnate, and not even of a magnate, but of a son or descendant of an ape, which can in no way be considered offensive, and from a fashionably progressive point of view should prove to be in the highest degree honorable.

Whether Nietzsche acknowledges this genealogy remains unknown to us; but it remains true, it remains a fact that even he is a son and has some relation to his parents (Japhetic or Chametic). We believe that even such an unnatural offspring as Nietzsche will not dare, after the works of Pasteur, to acknowledge himself as a product of spontaneous generation, especially since even then he would not have escaped sonship: even then he would have been a son, only the son of a blind force. Forgetting that even for a superman consistency is obligatory and not everything is permissible to him, he reasons to himself, dressed up and wearing an Apollonian mask, but not bothering to remember that Apollo was the son of Latona, and that Denis (Dionysus) also had a mother. “I don’t want a father! That’s mythology! (Why not mythical art?..) I am a scientist, I am a professor; I know only the abstract man; I am a humanist and would rather be a homunculist than be the son of man!..” And so, “raising a hammer,” this philosopher strikes the son of all fathers, creating an example of a new method of philosophical work—with a hammer. The “Twilight of the Gods” he calls upon has already arrived for him, already finds him at this work. But the complete darkness comes later, when the preacher of the superman appears, that is, the murderer of brotherhood, the worshipper of inevitability, of fate ("amor fati"), that is, of the death of the fathers, the preacher who promises every dying person millions upon millions of deaths, hidden under the name of "return" (Wiederkunft). And yet this coming horror turns out to be not at all terrible, because we, its prophet tells us, have already suffered millions of deaths in the past and have not even noticed it, so little noticed that we have to prove by the most abstract arguments the finiteness and constancy of the elements, <<*1>> just (let us note) in contradiction to the experimental modern science, for which even the atom has ceased to be indissoluble, indestructible. The finiteness and constancy of atoms is the only basis for the assumption of infinite returns. These endless returns, unconfirmed by science and (if they were possible) capable of leading to despair, must be contrasted with a single return as the result of the transition of nature through us from an unconscious, deadly existence to a conscious one, to the unification for the resurrection of all dead generations, which will become the ruling, conscious force of all worlds. But the Prophet of the Superman is deaf and blind to this majestic task; he is entirely in other dreams: “in every repetition, in every ring of the life of humanity, there always comes such an hour when, first in one (why in one? - N. F.), and then in many, and finally in all (and for all of them all this will supposedly happen by itself, without the assistance of man! - N. F.), one thought takes possession of the consciousness: the thought of the eternal return of everything in the world; and for humanity this is every time the hour of midday.” Our young man does not notice that even if everyone accepted such an idea, it would still remain only an idea, a supposition, or would turn into superstition if criticism were banished. How is it higher than the age-old teaching about a single return, transcendent and at the same time immanent?.. That a transcendent resurrection with hell and heaven can cause both horror and joy is well known; but where will the horror and joy come from the repetitions of our present life? Although there is much hell in it and very little heaven, nevertheless there is something finite or infinite, with enormous intervals of joy, can hardly cause anything but indifference in people, with the exception of those possessed, like Nietzsche, by the hypnosis of childish artistic fantasy.

But if the thought of returns aroused in him not joy but horror, then what, one wonders, did he gain by rejecting the Christian hell?..

Nietzsche, this philosopher not of midday but of midnight, this most empty man, writing in the pretentious style of rococo, talks about the "divinity of self-creation" and exclaims: "should we not become gods?" He seeks consolation in the theory of the eternal repetition (cycle) of blind nature, and not in human activity. [But admitting world repetitions,] it is necessary to admit that in the past our present has already been, that is, that we ourselves are a repetition of what was; in other words, we have already been and lived, only we know nothing about it now, just as we will not know anything in the future. But why is such a blind resurrection necessary?..

If nature remains forever a blind force, then such an absurd repetition [is not only permissible, but] even inevitable in eternity. But, one wonders, what greatness did Nietzsche find in the returns of such a terrible life?..

For those who have an attachment to the dead, the doctrine of returns is certainly joyless: it cannot have either a direct or indirect influence on the past eternity, and it can only influence the future indirectly, and then only in the sense of a desire for the speedy death of all the weak, if it is proven that they have absolutely nothing worthy of life, which, of course, is impossible to prove. This indirect influence on the future depends on a direct influence on the present, and if the latter became so powerful that all phenomena turned out to be the product of rational forces, then the returns would cease.

Is not the doctrine of infinite returns, produced by blind force, something unprovable and only transitional to the doctrine of a single return, demonstrable by deed, through the unification of all in the matter of turning blind force into one controlled by reason, into one that recreates and revives in the matter of a single return, which, as has already been said, is the transition of nature from an unconscious state to a conscious one?

1 "Wille zur Macht" is the last, unfinished work of Nietzsche.

*1 In this unclear expression, by the "finiteness" of the elements one should, I believe, understand not the destructibility or mortality of the elements-atoms, but the last extreme, uncrossable limit of the divisibility or differentiation of matter. By "constancy" is meant here, probably connected with the assumed, now indicated property, the stability and immutability of these indivisible foundations of matter. (V.A.K.)