(Regarding L.N. Tolstoy)

He who will give himself work to think, he will understand that there is nothing more illogical, more meaningless, how, rejecting the resurrection (fathers), to demand from the people of the brotherhood (sons), because it means, rejecting the cause, to recognize the investigation, unless, of course, under the fraternity, not the absence of hostile relations, but a real sense of kinship and precisely fraternal, assuming and complete knowledge of each other, and most importantly, the main thing, the main thing, knowledge of their own, and most importantly, the knowledge of their knowledge. unity in fathers. Until now, as much as we know, no one (and the least Tolstoy), no one gave himself difficult to think about what the essence of the fraternity is, although there was no talk about anything, and especially thick, like brotherhood. More than once it was spoken with Tolstoy about one work, which had no title; It was said in this work about universal resurrection, as a work of God, performed by the totality of the sons of human, united in this great, only, comprehensive deed. It was said about this essay that it was said to be called "the question of the causes of a non -contract attitude between people and the means of restoring the fraternity." Of course, it would be much more true and more accurately to say in the singular: “On the cause of the non -grade and a means of restoration of kinship”, since all the causes of the non -grade converge in one. This reason is a blind power that gives rise to and kills, in us and outside us the acting, word - all nature is this reason; And therefore, while the unconscious birth of the sons of the fathers will not turn to the conscious, bright resurrection of the sons and daughters of parents, until then there will be a brotherhood. Only in the natural, conscious case of resurrection people, i.e., sons, know each other and become brothers and can not even but become such. Without recognizing such a reason and such a means, Tolstoy, however, found that the very title, that is, “the question of the causes of the non -grade and means of restoration of the brotherhood”, “is fed from his soul.” This is a literal expression of Tolstoy. Almost twenty years have passed since then, and what has been done by Tolstoy to clarify the causes of non -grade and means to restore it? Non-thought, non-entry: do not study, do not serve! .. That's all! He rejected the resurrection, speaking or that there was no death, or that it is a good thing. A good thing “that bottomlessly black, terrible hole”, a bag that Ivan Ilyich cannot stick into with his inhuman cry: “I don’t want to!” What is death? Nothing? Or a good, or a terrible thing? Is it not a mockery of human meaning! There is no death, but is there love?! But if love was between people, then it would be necessary to either revive the dead or die with them.

Apparently, Tolstoy only from the time when he learned about the doctrine of resurrection, began to deny the very existence of death or find it good. Indeed, the necessity is especially moral - resurrection is so inevitable, so unquestioning that only if the death of death would not have a need for resurrection. And the knowledge is also necessary for knowledge, because the resurrection is a tactile proof of the sons of their origin from the fathers, their unity or fraternity.