The question of the forefront is the beginning of history, the task of which is to unite under “a place standing in fathers and forefront” to return his life.

The Father of History begins his story with the struggle of Europe with Asia; He, therefore, is the father of the history of the military. But he himself is the son of the father of the history of the sacred - the people, the people who still remember the general forefront of the warring units of the world. The question of the forefront, and not the struggle, is the true beginning of history, and the international study of this issue would already be the beginning of the redemption of sin of racket and struggle, although the subordination that ceases to struggle is not the true good, but maybe only by it. << 1>>

But in the question of the forefront, the enmity of Europe with Asia manifested itself: Europe, hiding behind scientists of impartiality, wants to be a ancestral homeless, contrary to the popular and sacred legend, which he considers to be a reference to Asia.

But if the history of the struggle cannot be the beginning, then it cannot be an end. At the very beginning of the struggle described by a secular historian, Byzantium, the New Ilion, the future Constantinople and the second Rome, the forerunner of the Third Rome, Moscow, becomes historically known. Moscow, not allowing the possibility of the fourth Rome, that is, refusing to have a son << 2>> and exclusively devoting himself to his son’s duty, thereby assumes a vow to restore the father (Constantinople), the second Rome, and reconcile him with the first. In the Union with the second Rome, abandoning the dominance and power, which made up the essential feature of Roman gathering or peace, and guided by the knowledge inspired by the son of love, Moscow will finally find the forefront and unite everyone in general, fraternal business.

The forefather of the history of the Western, the people of Western countries, begins its epics with a return to the ancestral home, to the grief of Prometheus’s pierce, to the near and distant (Indian) Caucasus. At the same time, the future world capital dominating the straits becomes mythically known.

The reproach that Plutarch makes the “father of history” in a lack of patriotism can even be more related to the “father of poetry” to Homer, who does not struggle the West with the East, and the victims mourn this struggle. Nestor should also attach to Herodotus, who not only recognizes the unity of the Slavs of the Eastern, Western and South, but also recognizes our connection with the Achies and other German peoples, with Rome, not to mention Tsargrad, as well as with the East, behind the Khvalynsky sea of ​​lying.

1 Archaeological Congress in Riga, at which two questions are posed: about the ancestral home and the international study, and could put the true beginning of history and begin an international study of the issue, which may be international, because, having discovered the grave of the common forefather, he will turn the nationality to the brotherhood.

2 St. Petersburg cannot be recognized as the son of Moscow: this is not a born, but an artificially created son of the West; If this is the son of Moscow, then, of course, illegal.