"Wonder, conquer all the nations, cutting!"

"Wonder, teach all the languages, cross!"

Islam is “humility to God”, that is, slavery, as opposed to the Christian sons. Before God, everyone is slaves: "Everyone, (says the Qur'an) who is only in heaven and on earth, comes to the gracious nothing more than a slave." Here is Islam!

If Christianity is fraternity through the adoption of the Fathers to the God, in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, to fulfill the duty of gratitude to the fathers, then Islam is the external union, a brotherhood in arms, through enslavement of themselves to the God of the Fathers (Abraham, Ishmael). Islam, therefore, this is universal, compulsory military service; And Christianity is universal, compulsory education for the conversion of warfares in the guns of regulation of nature forces. Islam and Christianity are the same opposite that war and peace, enslavement and brotherhood.

In the same respect, it is necessary, the pagan Athena to Christian Sofia, Athena, the patroness of the war, to Sofia, the Head of the World.

In a vertical position (person) and in his distortion, a guard position, two religions are given. The vertical position, as an expression of the lack of enmity and the presence of the desire of the world, and the guard position, as an expression of enmity, relate to each other, as Christianity to Islam and the paganism, the incarnations of the growth. Christianity created a temple, and Islam - a fortress; The goal of the first is revitalization, the second is only the protection of dust.

Not one Christianity, but Islam and even paganism recognize the Earth for the dust of the road and dear people, and at the same time for the ashes, "having in vast."

For Christianity, this is a surroundings <<*1 >> there is a higher duty, a common cause expressed by liturgical. For the Gentiles, the dead are not only the ashes, but also the shadows, and only the shadows; For Mohammed, these are shadows that have bodily, in addition to their will; For Christianity, mind and knowledge and will, united in business, give the body to shadows. Science, which is still in the pagan stage of its development, also recognizes only shadows or radiation images in the dead. However, the pagans were already lamented that they could not “grain” the dead, to resurrect them. History as a fact is not only mutual extermination, but also mythical or artistic, in funeral rites and monuments, resurrection. History as a project is not a union for mythical or only artistic, but for real, real resurrection. The conversion of warfares in the means of controlling nature for universal salvation by decision of the popular conference of the world would be the transition from the pagan-Magometan patronage position of the human race to peaceful, Christian.

*1 Nikolai Fedorovich stubbornly refused to write this word in the usual form “uprising”, not even wanting to bring this in the letter alone, a sacred concept for him with an unacceptable concept of hostile action, rebellion, internal -employees (V.A.K.).