The secularization (praise) (and at the same time profanity) of history consists in turning the actual reality of the past, which does not cease to live in us and influence us, into one abstract idea of ​​the past, expressed only in memory of it or in courtesy, which is considered all the more scientific than it is more objective, more impassive, in word, the more deadly it is. True, the story that comes from the feathers of party and political figures is imbued with a strong feeling; But she does not deserve the name of history, for although she is not insensitive, but she is addicted, she sins against the truth.

The definition of history, as soon as the mental reproduction of the past proves that those who give such a definition have only thought and imagination, and the feeling and will have nothing to do with it. Not allowing real, lively reproduction of the past prove that they themselves are dead. Truly, these are dead sons of dead fathers; in the stiff “intellectual” souls that have lost love for the past and the connection with it, there are only the corpses of the fathers, and not their living images; That is why these images do not affect either feeling or conscience; They are only an object of academic curiosity or negative criticism, dead both fathers and the god of fathers, turning it into God of the dead, and not living.

That is why Christ, who was resurrected in the souls of the Galilee fishermen, is not risen, but died in the minds of German and other professors and the "intelligentsia" in general. But if Christ is not risen, then the fathers do not resurrect in their souls, but live only in thoughts and performances. The “intellectuals” who are negative about the earthly fathers and to the Father of Heavenly do not feel outside themselves or in themselves the strength that can revive the fathers. The sages of our century assure that the future, the best generations, by virtue of the law of progress, will not even think about the past: history will not be either in the form of science or in the forms of art! Whether it will disappear as a moral duty - they do not say because they don’t recognize any duty to the fathers and they don’t know guilt before them. The images of fathers for these innocent creatures cannot appear in the form of reproaches of conscience.

From the same source from which the denial of resurrection occurs, Buddhism is also born: it proceeds from the denial of the benefit of life in the sense of Christian. With the denial of life, the rights and duty of feelings are denied, the soul itself is abolished and one void of nirvana remains.

Is it not clear that, with the denial of the life of the fathers and their resurrection, our own life becomes a question, is made meaningless and unbearable; There is no longer disappointment in it, but its denial, pessimism. Dissatisfaction with the present and hopelessness, the inconvenience of the future - this is the fatal consequence of the renunciation of the native past, from the history of life and death of our fathers. This is the terrible court of history on who, absorbed in the moment of the present, does not see the two infinites surrounding him: the past and the future, and puts himself above those to whom we owe our lives.