If intoxication is placed at the basis of the life of the world, then such a world will be a world of decline. Of course, both war and papal infallibility can also be produced from intoxication, stupefaction, and clouding of the mind. The highest degree of intoxication can also explain the origin of the new German-Turkic empire. <<*1>> The thirst for power, for exaltation, which has seized the founder of the new empire and requires large armaments, must lead to the final fall.

On the contrary, the cause is common, positive, and only it is an expression of sobriety; and the Circular of August 12, 1898 can be considered the beginning of sobriety if it initiates a common, positive, filial cause.

But sobering up should not be confused with the renunciation of... <illegible in the original>, nor with positivism, that is, with the subhuman, nor especially with that vagueness which distinguishes Nietzsche's views, nor, finally, with complete arbitrariness. It is possible and therefore necessary to begin history anew; it is necessary to "make history", Nietzsche believes: "Create in yourselves an image to which the future must correspond, and stop being epigones." But what is this image? Is it a project requiring implementation, or is it only a precognition of the future? And further - how many such images can there be and how to implement them? All this remains unclear. What does it mean to "enjoy all the cultures in the past, to feed on the noblest blood of all times"?.. The replacement of the unconscious old culture with a new, conscious one also does not contain anything definite in itself. This "feeding" on the noble past seems to boil down to one knowledge of it. But salvation is not in knowledge alone, but in creation! And is it possible to separate knowledge from action?..

In contrast to this uncertainty of the task of humanity or its tasks,<<1>> if there are many “images” according to which the future must be created, the unification of the living (sons) by converting the deadening force into a life-giving one will teach one single image, which will become the goal for universal activity and, in contrast to Nietzschean personal thirst for power, will eliminate all arbitrariness, and the very contradiction between the natural and the supernatural will be destroyed.

“The life you are living now, you will live an infinite number of times and you will die an equal number of times” (the first only presumably, the second—certainly!); that is, we will know that we will die, that no one will escape death, and that, in the words of Maupassant, “we will have the courage to live under this terrible, constant threat.” But such an assumption only aggravates the necessity of resurrection. Resurrection in this case will be the transformation of terrible, endless, painful repetitions into one life uninterrupted by deaths, connected not by an assumption, not by a hypothesis, but by a real, continuous consciousness.

And what, one wonders, is this Nietzschean cycle of things? Is it the cycle of heavenly bodies? Is it the cycle of the sun (the solar system) around an unknown luminary (which, incidentally, only we do not yet know)?.. Be that as it may, but by transforming these cycles into those controlled by reason, it is no longer we who submit to these movements, but these movements submit to us.

*1 Written under the impression of Wilhelm II's rapprochement with Turkey, a fact that completed the militaristic aspirations of the German emperor, deeply antipathetic to Nikolai Fyodorovich, as a threat to world peace (V.A.K.).

1 “There are (says Nietzsche) thousands of roads that no one has yet walked… How many things are still possible for man, the deepest, the highest, the star-like—his boundless power.” How certain all this is, isn’t it?..