Three kings (one real, and two future), who came from the West, are representatives of philosophy, rejecting insensitive rationalism and soulless criticism, but not satisfied with the philosophy of faith, limited by one feeling.

The Kremlin, to whom they worship, the Kremlin, as a representative of the Third Rome and Orthodoxy, with confidence in the invisible existence of a sample of unanimity and consent (the Blessed Trinity), calls for the unification of the sons of human for the implementation of the chain.

It is obvious that it was only felt, remaining the feelings invisible and unwilling among the philosophers, and that only anticipated, remaining only by the idea of ​​the philosophers of criticism, this was already going into the matter for the third Rome, the realization of the expected or future in the present.

The third Rome does not know either an abstract person or the debt of the abstract; He, like the Kremlin (cemetery of the fathers), knows only the sons of deceased fathers, that is, mortality recognizes only a synthetic judgment of a posteriori, and the return of life to all sons all the fathers recognize the judgment of the analytical a priori, that is, necessary and universal. If the first (mortality) is recognized for induction, that is, for the faithful and inevitable only with known phenomena, then the last (resurrection) is inevitable to be considered a long deductive, unconditionally mandatory.

*1 implies an almost forgotten historical fact of admiration in 1818. Before the Kremlin from the towers of the Moscow Rumyantsev Museum of the Prussian king Frederick Wilhelm III and his two sons: the future king Frederick Wilhelm IV and the future emperor Wilhelm I-th in gratitude for the salvation of Prussia and European from Iga Napoleon Russia. The following article and the next “bow or not to bow? Archive ”1896, No. 2, as well as the picture of the artist Matveev, depicting the scene of the worship of the Prussian princes to the Kremlin. (V.A. K.)