Will the West free itself from the yoke and oppression of Kantian criticism, based on class superstition and prejudice, on the superstition of a class doomed to inaction and condemned to thinking alone, on a prejudice that condemns the human race to eternal immaturity?

Having recognized the temporary situation as eternal, having recognized knowledge as the property not of all rational beings, but only of a few, Kant did not understand either perfect knowledge or the common cause. He could not understand that an irrational force, the world as a whole, incomprehensible to rational beings (taken) separately, could be understood and governed by all of them (taken) together. This sage did not understand what every simpleton understands, namely: that what exists in the speculative mind as a thought must become a deed in the practical. If theoretical reason represents the world both as it is and as it should be, then practical reason must represent it only in one sense, in what should be, that is, in the projective sense.

... By denying a rational being the ability to know or by limiting it to a size that makes truth inaccessible, Kant does not see the most obvious abnormality of such a situation: he takes people not in the state in which they should be, but in the state in which they are, that is, in the most immoral. He takes rational beings not only individually, but also in inactivity. Taking on the title of critic, he would have to ask himself the question: does he not introduce into his decision something personal, characteristic of a class doomed to inaction and to "odium philosophicum",<<*1>> an illness generated by urban (bourgeois) life? (It is Russia, as an agricultural, rural country, that should ask itself this question!) Callousness, heartlessness must also be taken into account when deciding such a question.

Recognizing rational beings only in isolation and inactivity, Kant condemns them to eternal limitation not only in space, but also in time, in the cosmos, which, if it has limits in space and time, then only by the absence of (active) rationality in it; that is: rational beings are limited by the absence of activity in them, in other words, strength, and the cosmos by the absence of reason in it. Kant separated psychology from cosmology, that is, souls from forces, which is true in fact (under the existing situation); but worship of fact is a great vice! Meanwhile, the cosmos needs reason in order to be a cosmos, and not chaos, which it (for now) is; rational beings need strength. The cosmos (as it is, but not as it should be) is force without reason, and man is (for now) reason without force. But how can reason become force, and force reason? Force will become rational when knowledge, when reason begins to control it. Therefore, everything depends on man… The onset of adulthood, which opens up a limitless field for the human race in its entirety, despite all its greatness and all its attractiveness, is met by the intelligentsia with dull indifference, and does not cause the slightest upsurge in the moribund, deeply fallen “scholarly” class. The yoke of Kantian criticism weighs upon it, and Kant is a representative of old age passing into infancy. Although he admires the firmament, he closes access to it for the human race. He also admires empty, contentless duty; but he is the true enemy of space and breadth. He, the philosopher of hopelessness and despair, sees boundaries and limits everywhere, which he imposes on all areas of life, on thought and on activity. Will the West free itself from the yoke of Kant's "criticism"?..

*1 Hostility on the basis of philosophy (lat.).