The idea of ​​world-civil history. 1784.

The supposed beginning of world history. 1786.

The end of all things. 1794.

Predictions of the nearness of eternal peace in philosophy. 1796.

On the recently appeared, arrogant tone in philosophy. 1796.

Transcendental dialectic, which recognizes only artificial experience, and not natural, which does not recognize the single perfect experience of all rational beings, relating to nature as a single whole, to all blind force, an experience through which the latter is all converted into something governed by a collective mind - this transcendental dialectic creates world-bourgeois history, in which experience finds its highest expression in factory production. World-bourgeois history rejects world-peasant history, through which alone natural, world experience, the world work of universal resurrection, can be accomplished.
Inventions that created a world-philistine history, dividing the mind into theoretical knowledge and practical, commercial and industrial knowledge:
1) the compass: it opened up the whole earth for knowledge,
2) the telescope and the whole universe, but also only for knowledge (for curiosity only);
3) printing: it created a special workshop of knowledge;
4) gunpowder: it became an instrument of commercial and industrial, practical, all too practical reason: it gave the whole earth into the hands of European exploitation.

The present century, finally, is beginning to produce inventions that can create a world-peasant history, give instruments of action on the earth in its entirety, to all people in their totality, and not for the sake of exploitation in a competitive struggle not so much for existence as for whims and comfort, but for the sake of universal salvation and peace in the world.
2nd article

After the publication of the Critique of Theoretical Reason and before the appearance of the Critique of Practical Reason, Kant (in 1784) published a work on the philosophy of history, which he did not classify as practical philosophy and did not criticize, because he saw in it the product of blind nature and did not admit the possibility of conscious, united human action. He did not recognize this action so much that, on the basis of the past, assuming that man will always be an instrument of blind force, he predicted the future, that is, the transformation of military relations between peoples into civil ones, in other words, the transformation of open war into hidden war and [rejected] the organization of humanity according to the type of triune (multiple unity), and believed such an organization possible only according to the type of organism.

This is the idea of ​​history in the bourgeois or urban, philistine sense, adopted by Kant, who already recognized, following the example of Turgot, that everything human (reason, feeling, anthropomorphism), introduced by people into nature, not only does not exist in it, but should not exist. This renunciation of the human and the subordination of humanity itself to the blind force of nature is positivism.

The result of the action of blind natural force is artificial urban life; and the world state, if such is formed, whatever form it takes, will be a transition from discord (war) to constraint, yoke. This artificial life, unnatural for man, is natural for blind nature; it is the result of its organization, the process of its integration.

The idea of ​​history according to the views of the universal, that is, peopleless, alien to all peoples, bourgeois or philistine:

From the very beginning, people are taken by Kant in their discord; unification is not supposed, but only the elimination of enmity is expected. And this negative benefit (the absence of enmity) is given to sons or distant descendants as a reward for the sins of a long line of ancestors. Such an end to history seemed to the burgher a great goal; the stronger the enmity in the present, the sooner, he thought, the reaction would come.

In the absence of a common cause, the object of which could be the whole world, people taken individually can only imagine this world and reproduce it in the form of artistic or manufactured toys. This is the development of abilities, which is discussed in the first proposition.

But the increase in the similarity of the idea (i.e. science) with its object (with the world) and the increase in the similarity of artistic toys with their originals (with "nature"), finally, the improvement of the transformation of crude original nature into elegant manufactured toys is a family matter, the matter of not one, but many generations. This is the 2nd position, according to which people who feel and are conscious become tools and spend their lives on the production of semblances, artistic and manufactured, and not on the production of reality that should be.

The 3rd position - limits the scope of human self-activity, placing life itself and the force that carries death within itself outside it.

The 4th position, having limited the scope of activity by immoral means, points to antagonism, to hostility and struggle, as means for reconciliation, as if rational beings could achieve reconciliation by renouncing reason!

The 5th position speaks of civil rights in place of robbery and plunder, turning citizens into non-brothers.

The 6th treats of political rights, the need for constant supervision, punishers and punishments; paternal education is replaced by police supervision and criminal court.

The 7th position is finally devoted to international law, on which the constitutions of nations depend...