FROM THE PROTOCOL OF THE EURASIAN CONFERENCE
(Prague, July 1934)

N.F. Fedorov: pro et contra: In 2 books. Book two

SPb.: RKhGA, 2008.
THE QUESTION OF THE FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF THE THEORY OF IDEOCRATY

K.A.Ch.—I connect this question with the question of Fedorovism.

As from the details of one astrological myth in the early days of Christianity arose the legend that Christians worship a donkey's head, so did the legend of chemical resurrection in Fedorov's teaching. Fedorov told the materialist to take up this1, and that's where it all started.

Christianity is the comprehension of the incomprehensible, truth is comprehensible and incomprehensible. The truth of Christianity is a conciliar truth, every revelation contains a particle of truth, since it is not fixed by councils. Fedorov's ethics is Christian ethics: it does not contradict dogma. According to Fedorov's teaching, man's calling is to be God's co-worker on earth. Man is the son of man, he is not equal to God, he is a co-worker and co-worker of God. This corresponds to Soloviev's concept: man is the highest creation, since he is given the concept of perfection. What should man do? He should strive to approach perfection. The problem of perfect ideocracy is also necessary in the development of ideocracy. The problem of perfect ideocracy is one of Fedorov's main concepts (it is also outlined by Metropolitan Anthony Khrapovitsky2). His concept of society is inseparable and unmerged. Man is created for eternal life. Hence the idea of ​​​​resurrection, mastery of chemistry, technology. This question is closely connected with Spektorsky's concept ("Christianity and Culture"): Christianity must master the process of technology3. I do not deny that there are also controversial elements in Fedorov's teaching.

I draw the following conclusion: the Eurasians said the first word about ideocracy without knowing Fedorov, and Fedorov developed this problem earlier. On this basis, I propose that the meeting establish that as we developed, we met Fedorov and he is, as it were, our collaborator, like Danilevsky, Khomyakov, etc.

It was decided to postpone the question of the attitude towards Fedorovism until the meeting of the EA Seminary that will be devoted to the collection "Ecumenical Cause".

K. A. Ch. outlined his understanding of Fedorov in a special note attached to these minutes. It should serve as material for debate at the aforementioned meeting of the EA Seminary. <…>
NOTE BY K. A. Ch. ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF N. F. FEDOROV

Whenever modern Christians (even sincere and “enlightened” ones) talk about Fedorov and his teachings, these Christians brush off both, saying: “What nonsense—the chemical resurrection of the dead. Oh, nonsense,” etc. Such an attitude in itself toward an undoubtedly great religious thinker (V. S. Solovyov’s teacher, F. M. Dostoevsky-like collaborator, and L. Tolstoy’s invincible opponent, not to mention dozens of outstanding followers[1]) casts doubt on the Christianity of such Christians. After all, it was the Pharisees who shouted: “What good can come out of Nazareth?”4—an argument that is not weighty and “too human.” The unwillingness to delve into the subject reveals the inertia and laziness of consciousness, qualities that are so contrary to the Savior's call: "be vigilant." The condemnation of Fedorov in absentia and the mockery of him involuntarily recalls the ignorant rumors about early Christians that were widespread in pagan society. It is well known what a fatal role the "donkey's head" and "the blood of infants" played in the fate of the first confessors of Christianity. The pagans claimed that Christians worshiped the donkey's head and drank the blood of infants. Such views could only have arisen in people who "heard the bell." Modern history has explained what exactly prompted the pagans to repeat nonsense about donkeys and infants: Christians symbolized Bethlehem with the image of a manger and cattle; and the rumor about the blood of a baby is a caricature of the sacrament of communion with the blood of the Most Pure Lamb. - So some contemporaries pull out "chemical resurrection" from Fedorov and are quite pleased with themselves, having mocked "such stupidity" ... Does Fedorov speak anywhere about chemical resurrection? Yes, he does. But where, on what occasion and to whom is he addressing it? - Fedorov, addressing limited materialists, turns their own thesis against them and compels them to expand their materialistic views. "If," writes Fedorov, "if it is true that man is a machine and nothing more; and if it is true that you, materialists, are zealous for the welfare of man, then try to find ways to restore, to assemble the machine when it has fallen apart" 5. The words just quoted contain the most powerful weapon against materialism, this is a weapon taken from the hands of this teaching. Indeed. If materialists speak seriously about their desire for the good of man and humanity, and if it is clear that the highest good is life (and, as Christianity teaches, perfect, i.e. immortal, eternal blissful life), then is it not logical to suggest that materialists build such a life, even if based on the view that man is a machine and nothing more? “Go to the laboratory (if all truth is in the laboratory) and seek the means of creating an eternal blissful life for everyone and with everyone”—

This is what Fedorov tells them. Let us agree that the main thing here is not “chemistry” as such, but the aspirations of the “chemists” themselves. Can one object to the suggestion of such aspiration? But, of course, the core of Fedorov’s teaching is not in this episode with the materialists. Fedorov (as has been shown on many thousands of pages by him personally and his followers) is not a “chemist”, not a “materialist”, but a “spiritualist” and a Christian. The center of his works is the doctrine of the Holy Trinity. In Russian religious and philosophical literature we know of only two authors who dedicated their speculations to this lofty Image: Metropolitan Anthony (“The Moral Idea [of the Dogma] of the Holy Trinity”) and Fedorov. Fedorov, indeed, makes a revolution in the understanding of Christianity and Christian dogmas. But this revolution is not in chemistry, but in the doctrine of projectivism. He asserts that the true meaning of Christian dogmas is that they are a system of commandments, they are a call and an indication of the ways to implement the call. It brings together and connects heaven and earth, God and man, and teaches about God-manhood in full agreement with the highest traditions of Orthodox thought. Fedorov categorically objects to the separation of God and man, which follows from the separate understanding of the "divine" and the "human". After all, the manifestation of God the Son, His incarnation established an inseparable connection between God and people. The Image of the Holy Trinity created (through divine inspiration) is not an "abstract" idea, but the greatest law of action. Humanity must strive to arrange (organize) its life in the image and likeness of the Holy Trinity. For Fedorov (as for all Christians), the phrase about image and likeness is not an empty phrase, but on the contrary, a binding revelation and an inevitable commandment to do. According to Fedorov, the Holy Trinity is an inseparable and unmerged union of perfect Persons. This divine Union is revealed to humanity not for "looking at", but for likening: the essence of projectivism (in this case) consists in the assertion that humanity must accept the Image of the Holy Trinity as a model for its own structure.

It is not difficult to see that this Fedorov concept contains the main idea of ​​Orthodoxy - the idea of ​​conciliarity, where the contradictions between "all" and "one" are removed, where a project is given for the coexistence of members of society: family, national and multinational. It is very strange to hear objections from people who call themselves Christians against the point about the participation of the human in the divine and vice versa. After all, the whole pathos of our faith lies in the conjugation of the Divine-human. And when “Christians,” in a fit of flattering self-abasement, begin to accuse themselves of weaknesses and sins, they must be reminded of the Teacher’s promise: “All this you will do that I have done, and greater things than this you will do.”6 In these self-accusations there is little faith, cowardice, and a lack of will to perfection. But is there Christianity here? — It is doubtful. — On the other hand, we must once and for all reject the reproach directed against Fedorov, which consists in pointing out his titanism. In “Easter Questions,” Fedorov speaks with complete clarity about man as an instrument of the divine mind, which (through faith, love, and creativity) becomes the mind of the Universe (F. O. D., vol. I, p. 399). Of course, Fedorov speaks of all-encompassing love: for the dead, the living, and future generations.

All these, so to speak, theoretical considerations have a direct bearing on our modern times. Our modern times are constructed in such a way that humanity has to choose between further development with Christ or without Christ. It is no secret to anyone that the technical development of humanity (thanks to the errors of Christian doctrine) has followed a non-Christian path. The phrase that “we can do without the hypothesis of God” has long been said. — But the question is: what God? — If by God we mean an extra-mundane Force or Being that once created the world and left it to the whim of the elements, then, of course, whether such a God exists or not is rather indifferent. But if God is “everything in everything,” if God is everywhere and always, then what about technology? Fedorov does not separate technology from other works of man, the instruments of God. He teaches how to master technology, in what direction to direct its development... In his time, V. S. Solovyov recognized that man is the real crown of creation and another, higher form of creation is not required, for he (man) has access to insight into perfection and is given unlimited means to achieve perfection ("The Meaning of Art")7. All the main thinkers of Orthodoxy agree in understanding art (the synthesis of all possible skills of humanity) as the main instrument for improving the life of humanity and its salvation and deification. Fedorov's merit is that he systematized this idea, made it visual and, so to speak, "modern". Fedorov filled the well-known position of Christianity "God became human so that we could be deified"8 with effective content, adding the requirement of duty and conscience. That is why we must necessarily recognize Fedorov, on the one hand, as a teacher of Orthodoxy (at the same time, the one closest to us in spirit and time), and on the other hand, as an organizer of of our consciousness, our reality. The organization of matter, the organization of spirit, the organization of the Cosmos—these are all ideas that excite the very air we breathe. Eurasianism constantly emphasizes its organizational role, its organizational calling. I see no reason to refuse to study such a great predecessor of ours as Fedorov. — On the contrary, he and his students created a grandiose system that represents a modern interpretation of Christianity, an interpretation that is capable of touching both the mystic and the materialist, the scientist and the technician, i.e. every soul; it is not for nothing that they say that every soul is a Christian.
NOTES
From the minutes of the Eurasian conference (Prague, July 1934)

Published from: Eurasian Notebooks. No. 4. Prague, 1934 (Appendix. Pp. 28-34).

On July 7-10, 1934, a meeting of the members of the Presidium of the Central Committee of the Eurasian organization with members of the Prague Eurasian Group was held in Prague. The meeting discussed the current state of the Eurasian organization, the attitude of the Eurasians to the post-revolutionary currents of the emigration and ideologically close figures of the Russian diaspora, and the strategy of action for the future.

On July 9, at the next meeting of the meeting, the question was raised about the attitude to the activities of N.V. Ustrialov as a former ideologist of Smenovekhovstvo and N.A. Setnitsky as a representative of the Fedorov movement. Speaking about his correspondence with Setnitsky, K.A. Chkheidze, in particular, said: "N.A. Setnitsky is not involved in current politics, he is building the ultimate ideal, he is a popularizer of Fedorov ideas. I myself was at one time against Fedorovism, having become acquainted with it in the interpretation of P.P. Suvchinsky, with whom N.A. Sbyl corresponded. <…> Later, I personally entered into correspondence with N.A. Setnitsky and continue to collaborate with him; ideologically, he is closer to me than Ustryalov. It would be desirable for the conference to answer the question of whether we consider that the work of the Fedorovites helps to restore spiritual ties with Russia and the spiritual fabric of Russia itself. It would be desirable for the conference to authorize me to declare to N.A. Setnitsky that we consider him an ideocrat and one of the people closest to us in spirit." After a brief discussion of the issue of the relationship of Eurasianism to Fedorovism (it was decided to hold a special meeting on this issue separately), in which both positive and negative opinions were voiced, P.N.Savitsky proposed the following resolution, which was adopted: "I propose that the meeting express deep gratitude to K.A.Ch. for creating relations with the groups of N.V.U. and N.A.S. K.A.Ch. established and maintained these Far Eastern connections single-handedly. I propose asking K.A.Ch. to continue and intensify these relations, but in no way confusing or identifying EA with Ustrialovism and Fedorovism. EA must be independent of them. But we must distinguish between our attitude to Ustrialovism, on the one hand, and to Fedorovism, on the other, since Ustrialovism contradicts practical EA, while Fedorovism in this sense does not contradict EA. Acceptance of Fedorovism is a matter of personal conviction for each Eurasianist, just as, for example, attitude to Dostoevsky. I propose to ask K. A. Ch. to support and develop friendly and informative relations with the Fedorovites, but the EA itself should distance itself from Fedorovism, considering at the same time that the acceptance of Fedorovism by individual Eurasianists cannot be considered a contradiction to the totality of Eurasian ideas” (Minutes of the meeting of the members of the Presidium of the Central Committee present in Prague with representatives of the Prague EA group // Eurasian Notebooks. No. 4. Prague, 1934. Pp. 9-11).

On July 9, as part of the discussion of the question “on the further development of the theory of ideocracy,” Chkheidze again raised the question of Fedorov. His speech and the note on Fedorov’s philosophy attached to the minutes are published in this edition.

1 See note 5 below.

2 See note 30 to the correspondence between Setnitsky and Berdyaev.

3 Chkheidze refers to the book by the philosopher, legal scholar, and cultural theorist Evgeny Vasilyevich Spektorsky (1875-1951) “Christianity and Culture” (Prague, 1925). Viewing culture as a manifestation of the supernatural, religious essence of man, as an effort “to creatively overcome matter,” to introduce spirit and beauty into it, to cosmize it, the philosopher extended the cause of culture not only to the artistic and social spheres of life, but also to nature as “the material environment for the Kingdom of God.” The cultivation of nature follows from the Christian attitude to the world. “Christ did not passively submit to nature and did not preach passive naturalism, but taught and acted as one having authority, so that both the wind and the sea obeyed him.” Another thing is that material creativity cannot be separated from the cultivation of the spiritual nature of man, and when they go in parallel, they bring unprecedented results. The more spiritual culture, spiritual strength a person has, the more submissive nature is to him. Then it does not command him, but he commands it. Then technology is possible. Then a miracle is possible. Every culture is supernatural. If the first experiences of overcoming nature were given by prehistoric stone arrows, axes and shards, then its crown is the transformation and resurrection of nature." Spektorsky emphasized that the New Testament does not oppose technology, that "technology and miracle" are "concepts that do not exclude each other and differ more quantitatively than qualitatively. Many of the achievements of modern technology would probably have seemed in those days to be miracles no less than those performed by the Savior and the apostles. And, conversely, other miracles of that time are not surprising from the point of view of modern technology." (Op. pp. 303-304).

4 Inaccurate quotation from John 1:46.

5 Retelling of a fragment of Part I of the "Question of Brotherhood" (Philosophy of the Common Cause. I, 288; Fedorov. I, 258).

6 Inaccurate quotation from John 14:12.

7 The idea of ​​man as a perfect form that arose as a result of the ascending movement of evolution, “which, together with the greatest physical beauty, also represents the highest internal potentiation of light and life, called self-consciousness,” is expressed by Solovyov in his work “Beauty in Nature” (1889). In his continuing work “The General Meaning of Art” (1890), he speaks of the purpose of man, who is called to spiritualize and transform existence on the principles of beauty and harmony.

8 Words of St. Basil the Great.

V.A. Kozhevnikov, N.P. Peterson, N.A. Setnitsky, Val. Muravyov.