1. The Pleasure of Beauty and the Pleasure of Life, from the Beginning of the School of Evolution, by M. Guyau. Review of the Two Worlds. February 15, 1881.

2. The Idea of ​​Death from Ancient Egypt and the Egyptian Tomb, by M. Georges Perrot, from the Institute of France. Review of the Two Worlds, February 1, 1881.

The majority of cultured people have apparently come to the conclusion that life has no serious significance, no meaning. As a result of this conviction, they so readily risk their own lives and the lives of others; as a result, there is such a universal desire for pleasure, such an insatiable thirst for enjoyment. Everything that previously had a serious, even sacred, significance turns into a game, into a simple amusement.

So it happened with art, when the beautiful, beauty, began to be considered separately, completely independently of truth and goodness, when art became an end in itself, "art for art's sake." "Kant already contrasted the idea of ​​beauty with the ideas of truth and goodness and reduced the beautiful to actions that should not result in any benefit, "to the free play of our imagination and our reason." Schiller formulated this idea even more clearly, asserting that art is, in its essence, a game, so that the artist, instead of surrendering himself to material reality, seeks only appearance, the seeming, and finds satisfaction in it. The highest art is that in which play reaches its highest degree, the maximum, in which we play, so to speak, with the very essence of our being, as we see in poetry and especially in dramatic poetry. The ideal, according to Schiller, is the gods of Olympus; they, freed from all needs, occupied themselves only with playing with human passions, using mortal personalities for this purpose, just as we in the drama play with exploits, crimes, virtues and vices that are not ours.

In our time this theory of Kant and Schiller has reappeared and has received wide circulation; it was revived in England by Herbert Spencer and by most modern aestheticians, with the only difference that now it is connected with the idea of ​​evolution. And in France the disciples of Kant agreed with Spencer that there is a complete analogy between aesthetic pleasure and the pleasure afforded by play. In the same way, in Germany the school of Schopenhauer looks upon art as a higher kind of play, capable of comforting us for a few moments from the sorrows of existence and preparing us for a more complete liberation from them, which is achieved through morality." According to the modern view, “the source of art, this refined play, is struggle, battle, and it appears as a harmless use of the excess of forces released as a result of general reconciliation. It constitutes, as it were, a safety valve in the mechanism of society” and, at the same time, is “gymnastics of the nervous system, of the soul”, which is absolutely necessary in the present state of humanity, for “civilization, while increasing in each of us the abilities of every kind, at the same time, and in complete opposition to this, divides occupations to an extreme; therefore it becomes necessary that the inequality of the work of our organs be compensated for by the play of various arts, since, […] if we do not exercise all our organs properly, a kind of nervous plethora will occur in us, which will inevitably be followed by atrophy, paralysis. […] such is the role of art in the course of human development. Consequently, the success of art coincides with the success of life and civilization; and its disappearance would indicate the end of civilization itself”, because the goal, according to the modern view, is to free man from any serious occupation, to turn him to amusements alone: ​​according to Schiller, “man is complete, expresses himself fully, only when he plays.”

A characteristic feature of aesthetic pleasure, according to Spencer, is that “it is not connected with any of the functions of life, that it does not bring any specific benefit: the enjoyment of sounds and colors, or even refined aromas, comes from simple exercise, from the simple play of this or that organ, without visible benefit. In aesthetic pleasure, from this point of view, there is something contemplative, refusing to be fruitful, wanting to be only the enjoyment of luxury.” Everything done not with the view of only the play of our organs or our imagination, everything that is not art only for art’s sake, is devoid of beauty. One can, no doubt, marvel at a work scientifically adapted to all needs, like a market, a pier, etc., but all this, according to Spencer and the even more definite Grant-Allen, cannot be beautiful. Summarizing the thought of Spencer and Grant-Allen, Mr. Guyau (author of the article "Le plaisir du beau") says that the distinctive quality of a beautiful object, in the opinion of these thinkers, is that "it has no purpose or has a false, imaginary purpose, so that beauty consists above all in uselessness, in a kind of deception that we perform on ourselves: the sculptor amuses himself with marble and chisel, as "a lion cub with a wooden ball that is thrown into his cage." According to the aforementioned thinkers, "a beautiful object can never correspond to a real need and cannot arouse in us either desire or fear; and if some statue made us, like Pygmalion, fall in love with it, the purpose of art would not be achieved. In the same way, the charm of the drama rests only on fiction, and if great scenic works appeared before us in reality, they would terrify us", they would produce the same impression as the appearance of a ghost, as the resurrection of a dead man.

According to this theory, what is truly vital, by virtue of this very fact, cannot be beautiful. Guyau himself does not consider it possible to agree with this theory: believing that beauty not only does not exclude the useful, i.e., fundamentally rational, but that even its origin is based on the benefit that it once brought; believing that "beauty was formerly simply a utility of which we are not always able to account at the present time," Guyau at the same time asserts that fiction, deception of the senses, "fiction, is not at all a necessary condition of beauty. Schiller and his followers, having reduced art to deception of the senses, accepted, according to Guyau, as an essential property only one of the shortcomings of human art, which consists in the impotence of reproducing life itself." Is it really so, Guyau exclaims, "that the Venus de Milo is beautiful only because she is made of marble and motionless? And if her eyes, which now express nothing, were filled with an inner light, if we saw that she was coming towards us, would we cease to admire her? [...] As if the highest desire, the unrealizable ideal of the artist consists not in breathing life into his work, not in creating, but only in depicting! If the artist does not achieve the first, it is only against his will; "just as a mechanic builds machines against his will instead of creating living beings. Deception of the senses (fiction) not only does not constitute a condition of beauty, but sets a limit to it, constitutes an obstacle to the attainment of beauty. Life, reality, is the true goal of art, and only because of the seemingly premature birth of its works has it not yet attained this goal." But having made this remark, having pointed to life, to the desire to create, as the goal of art, as the ideal of the artist, Guyau then completely forgets about this remark of his own, and, asserting that "everything serious and useful, everything real and living can, under certain conditions, become beautiful," goes on to analyze what constitutes the beauty of movements and the feelings themselves, from which movements borrow the greater part of their beauty, goes on to analyze the nature of sensations and finally draws the conclusion that "the beautiful, as in a grain, is contained in the pleasant, in which the good itself is contained. […] To live a full and strong life is in itself aesthetic; to live an intellectual and moral life, that is beauty in its highest manifestation, and in this lies our highest satisfaction. The pleasant is the luminous core, whose beauty is in its radiant halo; but just as every source of light emits rays, so every pleasure (not excluding drinking, eating, gastric functions, etc. - N. F.) strives to become aesthetic." The beautiful, according to Mr. Guyau, "leading to a full consciousness of life itself, cannot exclude the idea of ​​​​what is necessary for life; the first expression of the aesthetic feeling lies in the need for satisfaction, in life coming into equilibrium, in the revival of inner harmony." "We believe," says Guyau, "that nothing separates the beautiful from the pleasant; the difference between them is only in degree and extension, in the depth of action. […] Even physical satisfaction, becoming more and more refined, merging with moral ideas, will become more and more aesthetic. It is already possible to foresee the day (and this is the limit of progress) when every pleasure will be beautiful, when every pleasant action will be artistic; and we will then be like instruments of such full sonority that one cannot touch them without producing a musical sound; and then the slightest touch will resonate in the very depths of our moral life.” It is possible to foresee that a time will come “when every pleasure will contain, in addition to sensory elements, intellectual and moral principles, and it will be the satisfaction not of any one organ, but of the entire moral individual. Moreover, it will even be the pleasure of the entire genus represented in this individual. Then the original identity of the beautiful and the pleasant will again be realized; but it will be so pleasant that, so to speak, it will enter into the beautiful and disappear in it; and art will then be one with being; through the expansion of consciousness we will then come to a constant understanding of the harmony of life, and each of our joys will bear the sacred character of beauty." But although Guyau says that and art will then be one with being, but to say this does not yet mean to define the content of art; and therefore it is permissible to ask, what exactly will the art of the future consist of, what will be its role according to Guyau's theory? Will not the human race then migrate to theaters, art galleries, conservatories, and similar institutions? Will not telephones and similar devices for the pleasure of sight and other senses be installed in every hut? Or will not all work that serves to satisfy ordinary human needs acquire an aesthetic character? But if, according to Guyau, who, in contrast to Schiller, says that man is whole only when he works, precisely the latter must happen, then will not the decline of art indicate progress in life? Will not the decline of the arts mean that the forces used for art in the special, present, current sense of the word are being turned to life itself, to the work necessary to satisfy the real, general needs of man, and thus will not the decline of art indicate that the day is approaching when art will be one with existence?

And if this is so, then what has the artist's desire to breathe life, to create, and precisely to create, as Guyau himself says, and not just to depict? In the harmonious state of society that Guyau depicts, art will only have to maintain this harmony, and yet will not have the strength, will not be able to fulfill even this task, because death will constantly disturb the harmony established for a moment; and if every pleasure of even one individual will be "the pleasure of the whole species represented in him," then the same will, of course, be true of the feelings opposed to pleasure; and then what will human life become? Will it not be a constant suffering for all, together with each dying person, with each suffering person, because as long as there is death, there will be suffering, for even if a painless death is possible (although such a possibility is highly doubtful), then until a person has ceased to be a son and a brother, until he has lost the feeling of familial love, he cannot protect himself from grief for the dead, cannot stifle it within himself. Or, perhaps, having come “through the expansion of consciousness to a constant understanding of the harmony of life,” for us death will also appear as one of the chords of this harmony, and will not the mutual extermination in which all living beings find themselves be disharmonious?..

And yet the aspiration of art to reproduce life, to create, is so obvious that it is hardly possible to seriously dispute that the main, guiding meaning in art lies precisely in this aspiration. But how could such a aspiration appear if art is only a game, and the source of the game is struggle? Neither by evolution nor by any other means can we explain the origin of the desire to "give life" from struggle, since struggle obviously nourishes feelings that are completely opposed to this. In order to understand this desire in art, it is necessary to turn to the time of the emergence of art, to the beliefs of peoples in that first period of their existence, the beginning of which is lost in the darkness of prehistoric times. For this purpose, we will turn to the article by Georges Perrot "De la tombe Egyptienne".

Although this article speaks only of the Egyptians, on the basis of data obtained by Mariette, Maspero, and others, yet Perrault repeatedly insists that the beliefs of the Egyptians are not their peculiarity alone, that they were common to all ancient peoples in the first period of their existence, and had such a strong power over the soul of primitive man that, thanks to these beliefs, all legal, social, and private relations were poured out as if into a single form, imprinted as if with a single seal, from India to Italy; and in proof of this position he refers to such an authority as Fustel de Coulanges. According to the beliefs of the peoples in the first period of their existence, not everything perished with death, and that which survived the deceased, the Egyptians called Ka, a term which Maspero translates by the word double (le double). The double was "a second copy of the body, but of a matter less dense than the corporeal; "he was a colored shadow of the individual, consisting, however, of air, and, the devil take it, point for point, resembling the deceased." "This double had to be placed and arranged in a house adapted to his new existence, surrounded by the objects to which he had once been accustomed, and especially it was necessary to feed him with food to support his life. This is what the dying man expected from the love of his own; this is what he received on certain days on the threshold of the "good" or "eternal" dwelling, as the Egyptians said. Only sacrifices could arouse and continue the existence of this phantom, constantly hungry, constantly thirsty, constantly in fear of perishing from the negligence of his offspring. A dependent, precarious, painful life! .. The first duty of the living was to ensure that the dead did not suffer from hunger and thirst; "imprisoned in the tomb they could not take care of their own needs, and therefore children should not forget their fathers and ancestors, but should feed them with bread and meat, quench their thirst with libations; and if the living neglected this sacred duty, the dead became angry, irritated against the living. The mysterious existence into which the dead entered gave them a terrible, as it were, divine power, and their anger faithfully, unerringly overtook the ungrateful who abandoned them and insulted them." "It is very natural that the first necessity for the maintenance of this dark, uncertain life, which began in the tomb immediately as soon as it received its eternal guest, was the body; and therefore nothing was spared in order to delay (its) destruction as long as possible, to preserve intact the organs with which the double or soul would perhaps someday come to unite and thus restore the unity of the human being. The embalming, done with all possible care, with a minuteness that reached the point of meticulousness, made the mummy almost indestructible, at least as long as it remained in the dry soil of Egypt. […] But in order that all the expenses of dissection, perfumes, and bandages might not be wasted, it was necessary to place the mummy above the surface to which the highest waters of the Nile floods rise; therefore, when it was necessary to arrange a cemetery, they chose either an elevated place bordering on the desert, as near Memphis and Abydos, or the slope of a mountain, as at Beni Hassan and Thebes. Nowhere in the whole valley of the Nile has an ancient tomb been found that was reached by the flood.

It would seem that the corpse is sufficiently protected from destruction, first by skillful embalming, then by the precautions taken to ensure that the coffin is safe from the strongest floods. But when studying the plan of the tomb and its arrangement, one cannot help but notice the cunning constructions to which the Egyptian architects resorted in order to conceal the entrance of the tomb and make access to it as difficult as possible for anyone who might think of entering it with an evil intention: there is no obstacle, no trap that would not be placed on the way to the tomb; and all this was done with such patience and ingenuity that very often modern researchers and excavators are driven to despair […] Thus Mariette liked to say that in Egypt there are undoubtedly such well-hidden mummies that they will never, in the absolute sense of the word, appear in the light of God.

However, despite all efforts to preserve the body, it could happen that hatred, and even more often greed, destroyed all the most subtle calculations in this regard. An enemy might go looking for the deceased in his sarcophagus itself, to tear and dismember his limbs, and thus inflict a second death on him, more cruel and irreparable than the first; a thief, in order to more easily seize the gold and jewels with which the corpse was adorned, might drag it out of the burial chamber and throw it in the open, naked and dishonored, dooming it to rapid destruction. But, exposed to so many dangers, the mummy was alone; and if it were somehow destroyed, what would become of the double? This fear, this horror of the fate of the double, in the event of the destruction of the body, suggested the idea of ​​creating an artificial support for the double, a statue. In this case, they tried to reproduce not only the costume and ordinary state of the deceased, to indicate his sex and age, but also to express his individual character, to depict his face, physiognomy, they strove to achieve the accuracy of a portrait. The use of writing made it possible to inscribe the name and qualities of the deceased on the statue, and these indications brought the accuracy of the representation of the disappeared person to perfection. Thus, a statue defined by the inscription and the likeness of the person served to prolong the life of that phantom, which would constantly risk dissolving and evaporating if it did not find material support, a support to which it could cling, which it could grasp.

"Statues were more durable than mummies and nothing prevented them from being made in as many as desired. One body represented only one chance of existing until the return of the double; twenty statues represented twenty such chances, possibilities. As a result, sometimes an astonishing number of statues are found in one tomb. The reverence and love of relatives multiplied the images of the deceased to an extraordinary degree and by the mere multitude of these unfading supports of the body of the double ensured almost immortality for him." “In the thickness of the stone mass that formed the tomb, a special room was arranged for the preservation of these statues—of wood and stone—safe from the gaze and any immodest curiosity; other images were placed in the rooms of the tomb or in the courtyards in front of it. Finally, important persons received permission from the king to place their statues in temples, where they were under the protection of the sanctuary and entrusted to the care of the priests. […]

But, in order to resist destruction, the double needed more than just the stability of the image […] afterlife […] for I required a multitude of mutually cooperating conditions for my continuance; this life was entirely material; the living dead felt hunger and thirst; he needed food and drink. This food was supplied to him by provisions placed near him; then, when it was possible to suppose that the provisions laid with him were exhausted, it was renewed by funeral feasts, which were celebrated in the tomb, and in which the deceased also took part. The first of these feasts was given after the funeral ceremony; then these festivities were continued and repeated annually, several times a year, on days fixed by tradition, and, besides, were often called for by the deceased himself, who knew how to express his will. For such meetings a room was arranged in the tomb, open to all; it was a kind of chapel, or, if you like, a kind of dining room, where relatives and friends gathered. At the foot of the column, where the deceased is represented as worshipping Osiris, the god of the dead, a sacrificial table was set up, on which food intended for the double was laid, and libations were poured. A passage was left in the wall, through which the pleasant smell of roast meat, fragrant fruits and incense, burning incense, reached the statue.

In order to ensure the correctness of this service and not to be in danger of dying of hunger in an abandoned, unattended tomb, one could not limit oneself to counting on the love of one's descendants; after two or three generations, love could cool and care for the deceased weaken. Moreover, in the course of time, his family could disappear, die out. Therefore, every king, every prince, every person of any wealth and importance took care to make a contribution for eternal times for the maintenance of his tomb; for this purpose they bequeathed the income from their estates, which were also to support the priests who were obliged to perform the commemorations […] For the same purpose they began to bury with the deceased his weapons, clothes, jewelry and, in general, all the objects that he might need in another life; it is well known what treasures of this kind the Egyptian tombs and their burial accessories reveal to us […] And this was not a custom peculiar only to Egypt; it existed among all the peoples of antiquity, both civilized and barbarous: in the most ancient memoirs of the Hellenic tribe there is preserved a trace of the existence of a custom, similar to that described by Herodotus among the Scythians, of sacrificing, after the death of a chief, his servants and wives, so that they might form the company of the deceased in the other world […] The Egyptians achieved the same thing without making bloody sacrifices: they surrounded the deceased with sculpted and pictorial images of everything he needed, beginning with the servants connected with his person and the artisans necessary for his services in the other world, to food and all the objects of economy and luxury […] Real food could not be kept for too long; besides, neglect on the part of the living, the suppression of the family name, and similar accidents could deprive the deceased of the necessary food, cause him to suffer and, finally, die of exhaustion; in the same way, clothes and utensils could wear out, spoil, break over time; and the dimensions of a simple grave would not allow one to put there everything that a guest of an underground dwelling was accustomed to find around him […] (All these dangers and inconveniences were prevented by images. - N. F).

From ancient times, scenes taken from the daily life of the Egyptian people have not ceased to be depicted on tombs; and when they first began to be discovered and studied, various explanations were offered for them: some saw in them an illustrated biography of the deceased, a depiction of what he himself did, or at least of what he was present at during his life. Others saw in them images of life after death, a varied picture of the joys and pleasures that were available in the Egyptian Elysian Fields for the deified dead.

But both of these explanations did not stand up to careful study and criticism of both the pictures themselves and the inscriptions accompanying them. It was very soon noticed that the scenes depicted in the tombs were not of an anecdotal nature; only in very rare cases did the circumstances depicted relate to one or another person in particular and distinguish him from the rest of his contemporaries. Thus, there are tombs in which the dead person seemed to wish to set forth the measure or degree of his merits, of course, in order to enjoy in the next world the same position he had acquired in this life, so that there the series of honours and successes begun by him here would continue - in such cases the inscription, like the images on the column and walls, take on in some parts a biographical character […] But in any case, such tombs are only exceptions; usually, the necessary images almost always have the same content, to which they return constantly, with such persistence that can only characterize themes that were in general use, passed down by tradition from generation to generation, from generation to generation. At the same time, "m the figures accompanying the descriptions of the flocks and other property of the deceased always have something hyperbolic, hardly in accordance with reality. On the other hand, in all these images, all kinds of artisans, from the ploughman, the baker, the butcher, to the sculptor included, devote themselves to their professional activities with unusual zeal, with amazing diligence; all these people, from the farmer to the artist, try and work as if they were quite consciously and zealously working to fulfill the task imposed on them by duty [...] To understand for whom they are working so, it is necessary to enter into the ideas of the people who painted these images, and to compare these images with the texts that accompany them." According to Maspero, "in choosing scenes to decorate their walls, the Egyptians had in mind their magical effect; and, depending on where the deceased had to be led behind the coffin, these scenes were supposed to either ensure a happy existence for him there, or protect him from the dangers that could threaten him in that life. The images on the walls of the tomb ensured for the deceased the performance, the execution of those very actions that were depicted. The double, or whatever he was called, enclosed in his stone cocoon, saw himself on the wall going hunting; and this meant that he was actually going hunting; saw on the wall that he was eating and drinking with his wife, and this meant that he was actually eating and drinking with her; saw himself safely and in perfect health sailing in the boat of the gods through the terrible lands of hell, and this meant that in reality he was sailing through them in complete health and well-being. Ploughing, harvesting, and stacking grain in barns, depicted on the walls, were for the deceased these very same actions.

As the funerary figurines, which were placed in the grave of the deceased, performed all the field work for him and, under the influence of the magical chapter from the "Book of the Dead" (inscribed on the bodies of these figurines. - N. F), […] went to draw water or carry grain, in the same way craftsmen of all kinds, depicted or even only listed in the inscriptions, sewed shoes, prepared food for the deceased, accompanied him on hunting or fishing […] Thus this whole world of vassals, placed on the walls, was as real as the double, or soul, on which it depended: the drawing of a servant was enough for the shadow of the master. The Egyptian believed, when he filled his tomb with images, that he was assuring for himself, beyond this earthly life, the reality of all the objects and scenes represented: this is what encouraged him to build tombs for himself while he was still alive. Relatives, performing the mysterious ceremonies that accompanied the burial, believed that by their actions they were bringing a real benefit to the deceased: the confidence that they had rendered a service to someone who was dear to them supported and consoled them on their return from the cemetery, when the burial was over, and the dead man, finally, alone in his tomb, remained the manager of his imaginary possession. In the care not to leave the poor dead man, who could no longer help himself, without everything, they were not content even with wall images of food and utensils: however large the space they covered and the variety of their images, in any case their number was limited; they might become exhausted, they might not suffice to satisfy the ever-renewing needs of the deceased; therefore they went further and attributed a magical power to the prayer contained in the sacred sayings - to multiply and renew infinitely all the necessities of life, without which the inhabitant of the grave could not do. In the main place in the tomb there is usually a painted or sculpted image of the deceased, followed by his family. "The deceased is depicted bringing various objects as a sacrifice to a god, mostly Osiris; under the image there is an inscription, always composed according to the same model, the content of which is the following: "Sacrifice to Osiris (or to some other god), so that he will provide the double of the deceased N, the son of N, with bread, drink, beef, geese, milk, wine, beer, clothing, incense and in general everything good and pure, everything necessary for existence." Below, the deceased is often represented as already receiving from his family the same sacrifices that he offers to Osiris. In other places in the tomb are found images of various objects, and these images are also given a real meaning; in the inscriptions that are below these images, they are offered directly to the one who is to use them, but in the inscriptions placed above them, for greater certainty that the objects depicted will reach their destination, their delivery is entrusted to the god. The god is given provisions with which he must supply the double; through the mediation of Osiris, the doubles of bread, drink, and beef pass into the other world and there serve as food for the double. But in order for the sacrifice to be real, it was not necessary that it should always be real, or even have the appearance of reality, it was not required that art necessarily reproduce produced its likeness in stone." "Every passer-by, repeating the formula of the offering in honor of the deceased, thereby gave into his possession all the objects which he enumerated. Therefore many of the Egyptians ordered to be inscribed next to the ordinary text another appeal to those whom chance brought to their tomb: "O you who live on earth, simple people, priests, scribes, warriors, all who would enter this resting place, if you love life, if you do not want to know death, if you want to be in favor with your gods and do not wish to experience the horrors of the other world, but want to be buried in your tombs and transmit your dignity and position to your children, read or repeat after the one who reads them the following words: "An offering to Ammon, lord of Karnak, that he give the best loaves, vessels with the best drinks, the best oxen, the best geese, the best clothes, the best of all good and pure to the double of such and such."

As a result of these subtle precautions and the passion with which they devoted themselves to the invention of means for the best protection of the dead from the destruction that threatened them, for the best provision for them against hunger and thirst, and for the best possible and happiest life for them in the coffins, the tomb actually became such that it deserved the name of "the house of the double," a name that was often given to it. The double, comfortably arranged in this dwelling adapted to his needs, received there the visits and sacrifices of relatives and friends; he, as Maspero says, "had priests who were paid to offer him sacrifices; he owned animals, lands, slaves, who were supposed to provide him with maintenance; he was like a great lord, a rich landowner, living in a foreign country and disposing of his property through his stewards." There was no Egyptian who had the slightest opportunity for it who would have spared any expense for his tomb. “Then they did not allow death to come upon them suddenly, as usually happens with us: from the king to the most simple private person, while still alive, and very long before death, everyone began to build under his own immediate supervision a tomb in which he intended to rest. Personal foresight during life and the love of relatives after death neglected nothing to decorate, supply with everything necessary, arrange as luxuriously as possible that dwelling which could never again be abandoned by its owner. The palaces of princes and rich men have left no traces on the soil of Egypt; the tombs very often remain completely intact even to this day; and only in them have the treasures of Egyptian art been preserved, which are being discovered at the present time. All other nations of the ancient world acted in the same way as the Egyptians; or rather, imbued with the same feelings, they concentrated on the same thing that was the dominant trend in the life of the Egyptians - on the care of the dead. When at the present time it is possible to open an ancient grave, fortunately still untouched, it is impossible to refrain from astonishment; and this astonishment is equally profound, whether such a grave is opened in Egypt or in Phoenicia, Asia Minor, in Cyprus or in Greece, in Etruria or in Campania; because in every such grave they find buried, without hope of ever being revealed to human sight, a multitude of precious objects and the most perfect works of art for their time.

With us, when, out of pride or love for the deceased, we decide to decorate a grave, all the efforts of architecture, sculpture and painting are concentrated on the exterior of the tomb, on the structure rising above the grave. As for the grave itself, the pit in which the mortal remains rest, even under the most luxurious monuments of our cemeteries it is as simple, as devoid of any decoration, as under the most modest. The coffin of the poor is hardly distinguishable from the coffin of the rich: some have pine, others oak, that is all the difference; and in a thousand years, when all the structures on the surface of the cemeteries have fallen into ruin, it will be difficult to guess the position of the deceased from the indications that can be obtained by excavating the graves themselves […]

Modern funerary architecture has as its starting point the idea that the grave is empty, that what is laid in it soon leaves it, perceived or, as it were, carried away by the flow of world life. Under these conditions, the tomb becomes only a monument, a memorial, a testimony to the more or less sincere feelings of a family or society experienced at the loss of one of its members.

The idea of ​​the ancients was completely different from this idea, or, better to say, completely opposed to it: for them, the tomb was an inhabited house; the deceased lived there, although he lived in his own way, as one can live only after death. This concept, common at that time, made it obligatory for the construction of a tomb to have a completely different program than that which an architect must follow when building a tomb according to modern requirements (which have in mind not the deceased, but the living, to whose astonishment and memory the crowd ько and the monument is built. — N. F.)».

No matter how much the cult of the dead described here may surprise us, no matter how much it may disturb us, and even “scandalize us with its naive materialism”, no matter how difficult it may be for us to account for the state of mind so unlike ours and for which there was as yet no distinction between living beings and inanimate objects, which could not yet understand existence in conditions other than our own, and therefore attributed to everything around us a soul similar to ours, — in any case, if we seek the meaning in this cult and what first inspired it, we will find there, in the words of Perrault, “memories and regrets about lost love, about affection broken by death; we will find there the gratitude of children to their parents, the gratitude of the living, prescribed by duty, to that long line of ancestors, by whose difficult efforts all those blessings which the present enjoys were created. There is no doubt (Perrault remarks.—N.F.) that in these funeral rites there was an element doomed to destruction, which the progress of thought was bound to put out of use. Of course, the efforts of the Egyptians and Greeks to feed the souls of their ancestors with blood, milk, and honey can only make us smile; but we cannot help but admit that all these peoples, despite their simplicity, foresaw a truth which we are often unable to embrace in our day, thanks to the so-called revolutionary spirit with its childish and savage contempt for the past. In their own way, the ancients deeply felt the bond that unites all generations of the human race. Guessing this in their hearts, they thus forestalled the results to which modern thought arrives through an attentive and thoughtful study of history. Philosophy derives from this conviction, based on evidence, and from the consequences to which it leads, the principle of high morality; but before philosophy could think of it, this very idea, the idea of ​​the unity of all generations, and the feelings of love and respect to which it leads, were for primitive peoples a powerful means of moral improvement, a strong bond for the family and society." The beliefs of the ancients gave unity, meaning, and purpose to life, determined its task; suicide was then unthinkable, and if such a fact had happened, the suicide would have caused universal horror, disgust towards himself, as a vile traitor to his fathers, ancestors, who needed his service for their afterlife. That vague melancholy, boredom, illness with which so many are infected in our time, and which comes from the fact that they do not know where to put their strength, what to do with themselves, and therefore so easily succumb to all sorts of chimerical tasks, if only to devote themselves to something, to find some use for their strength, was impossible then. Nothing of the sort could have happened in those distant times when the consciousness of the unity and close connection of all generations was not only a thought but also a feeling that determined the structure of life, its task, a task so enormous that no amount of force could be too great to accomplish it; no matter how great the forces that a person could command, they all found application in ever newer measures to ensure life, even in the afterlife. But this life seemed then to be real life. Then the question of the purpose of art, of its significance, could not arise; such theories as the theory of art for art's sake, science for science's sake, etc., could not be born, because then everything was for one, great, all-encompassing purpose. And only at the time when the image, the picture, was given real significance, and at the same time when man set himself the task of creating a body for the dead, of maintaining their life, only then could the desire to reproduce life, to create, be embedded in art, a desire by which art lives to this day, and cannot lose it without losing its serious significance. This desire is the best proof that the source of art was not struggle, that it is also not a game, that its source must be sought in love for the dead.

But just as the ancients were right in recognizing the unity of all generations, and wrong in imagining the dead to be alive, so we are right in not considering the dead to be alive, but wrong, incomparably more wrong than the ancients, in reducing life to a simple subjective idea, wrong in turning life into a meaningless phantasmagoria. At the present time the task is to finally find the lost meaning of life, to understand the purpose for which man exists, and to arrange life in accordance with it. And then, of itself, all the confusion, all the nonsense of modern life, capable of inspiring horror and plunging into despair, will be destroyed; then it will also be impossible that wild and unreasonable contempt for the past which, according to Perrault, characterizes our time and which clearly indicates that we do not realize where and why we are going, if we can treat our point of departure in this way. If we do not understand what our duty and our purpose are, then, obviously, we must perish, and, one must think, our perish is near: in the blind hope against each other, in the state in which we find ourselves at the present time, when struggle in all its forms (competition, rivalry, etc.) is regarded as the sole motive force of progress, when everything, including even art, is taken out of the struggle, it will not take us long to devour each other. What, however, is the duty of a being who has nothing of his own, who does not own his life or any of its conditions, who has all this given, given without his labor, who has no rights, absolutely no rights, even to his own, as we are accustomed to say, life? What can be the purpose of a mortal being?

Love for the dead among primitive people was not limited to such a narrow circle as among us, who barely remember our grandfathers; it embraced the entire race to which the person belonged. Despite our dissimilarity in this respect, we can, however, thanks to a deep study of history, understand and appreciate this feeling, although only in thought. And not only this: despite the difficulty, we can even understand that state of mind which made primitive man incapable of imagining anything dead, not alive, which forced him to attribute to everything a soul similar to ours. We ourselves, who are able to distinguish the living from the dead, and for whom the state of death is incomparably more understandable than that of life, have finally come to the conviction that life itself does not actually contain anything real in itself, and this to such an extent that, according to the modern view, there is not even the possibility of convincing ourselves whether the world appears to another in the same way as it appears to me. And from this point of view, Fichte had the right to say that with every severed head the whole world perishes. Does it not follow, however, that life as a deception is even worse than death, which is why projects of universal self-destruction appear? Thus, just as primitive man could not understand death, so the meaning of life is lost for us.