(Ptolemaic and Copernican art)

Art as a likeness—likeness to everything in heaven and on earth—is a reproduction of the world as it appears to the external senses; it is a reproduction of heaven and earth, but heaven and earth not as expressions of the Divine will, but as the actions of blind forces of nature, not only not controlled by rational beings, but also recognized by them as gods (Uranus, Cronus). The art of likeness is the depiction of heaven, depriving us of life, and of the earth, swallowing up the living. That is why this art is condemned by the divine commandment as paganism, as idolatry or idolatry (i.e., worship of idols depicting powerful forces, instead of controlling them) and ideolatry (i.e., worship of thought that does not turn into action, of idle, soulless, idle knowledge, of the learned). The reproduction of the world as it appears to the external senses and is interpreted either by the internal sense of the sons of men who preserve love for their fathers, or by the internal sense of sons who have forgotten their fathers, the prodigal sons, is in both cases the art of similitude; but in the first case it will be sacred, religious art, while in the second it will be secular, worldly art. Sacred art is the reproduction of the world in the form of a temple, which unites all the arts, and the temple as a work of architecture, painting and sculpture becomes an image of the earth giving up its dead, and of heaven (the vault of the temple and the iconostasis), inhabited by living generations; and as a receptacle of singing, or rather of the funeral service, the temple is a voice, to the sounds of which the dust on earth revives as a cemetery and heaven becomes the dwelling place of the living.

By singing or the funeral service is meant the entire divine service; this is the liturgy as the work of God accomplished through the sons of men; this is the all-night funeral service for the dead or their images, corresponding to the lamentations calling for rebellion; and then the daytime unification (unification) and teaching (catechumenate), preparation for the liturgy of the faithful, faithful fathers of God, which (liturgy) is the transformation of bread and wine, produced from the dust of the earth, into living body and blood.

The art of the sons who have forgotten their fathers will be a reproduction of the world in the form of a world exhibition, in which industry is added to all the arts. The exhibition itself is an image of a woman, to whose service the sons who have forgotten their fathers want to turn all the forces of nature, in order to strengthen the charm of sexual attraction; and, thinking to find life in this attraction, they find death, and only hope for the return of life in children.

Sacred art only violates the commandment when it takes the image for reality, for genuine resurrection and singing, i.e., the liturgy of the temple, for the extra-temple work of resurrection. Secular art in the form of a world exhibition violates all ten commandments and, committing a sin against faith, sins even more against reason, since it subjects it to the blind force of nature, forcing it to serve it instead of controlling it.

In its correct definition, art is not separated from science, nor from morality and religion, and is presented as it is in the very life of the human race, in history. Beginning with the first uprising of man or his vertical position, the pain of the loss of his closest beings forced the one who suffered the loss to raise his face, to turn it and his whole being to heaven; and such a position is an expression of religious feeling and awakened thought, imprinted by art. (Orthodoxy, which requires standing and allows sitting only as a condescension, differs most significantly from Catholicism and especially from Protestantism by this external expression, i.e. standing.)

The transition from the art of similitude to the art of reality, from Ptolemaic art to Copernican art, should be a museum of all sciences united in astronomy, i.e. a museum with a tower and, in connection with the temple-school, with a tower for observing falling stars, i.e. for observing the continuing structure of the world, and at the same time its fall, as well as for meteoric observations, passing into experience, into action, through the conversion of military art into natural science.

Esthetics is the science of the recreation of all rational beings that have ever existed on the tiny earth (this droplet that has reflected itself in the entire universe and reflected the entire universe in itself) for the spiritualization (and management) of all the enormous heavenly worlds that do not have rational beings. In this recreation lies the beginning of eternal bliss.

The manifestation of power in weakness is the law of earthly and extraterrestrial history, and at the same time, the essence of Christianity, as the opposite of Buddhism and as salvation from it. The earth is a cemetery, and, as having a history, it contains more content than all the worlds that do not have such a history. Until now, consciousness, reason, and morality have been localized on the earthly planet; through the resurrection of all the generations that have lived on earth, consciousness will spread to all the worlds of the universe. Resurrection is the transformation of the universe from chaos, to which it is heading, into space, i.e. into the splendor of incorruptibility and indestructibility. 

In nothing are the depth and richness of wisdom so expressed as in the salvation of the boundless universe, in the salvation that comes from such an insignificant speck of dust as the earth. The habitability of one earth and the uninhabitability of other worlds is a requirement of the highest moral law. If the world is not the product of blind chance, then between the multitude of dead generations and the multiplicity of worlds there is given a possible expedient relationship, so that from one dust of the earth, from one blood, all the inhabitants of all worlds may be produced. But even if the world were the product of chance, a rational and sentient being could not fail to make use of the multiplicity of forces for the reanimation of so many generations that have lost their lives. On the earth itself we have a semblance of localization in an insignificant space and then the spread of what is localized everywhere throughout the earth. Palestine and Hellas provide an example of such localization: art and science in Greece, and religion in Palestine, from whence they then spread throughout the earth. But only by combining religion and science is it possible to further spread the influence of rational beings beyond our earth. Palestine and Hellas are representatives of the East and the West, the struggle between which constitutes history.