In 1891, when America was experimenting with rainmaking, the famine in Russia and India, which arose from the same cause, lack of rain, seemed to speak eloquently to the supposed masters of land and ocean about the necessity of testing the American experience by introducing observations of meteoric phenomena during maneuvers and battles. But both Russia and England remained deaf to these, if one may say so, signs of the times, although the Pamirs lying between them, separating them, this roof of the world, could have become a center of regulation and from separating to become uniting, from the center of enmity to become the center of peace. Just recently <1> there was again a famine in India (1896), from which millions of people perished, and in the famine in Russia in 1897 they did not even recall the American experience. <2> It must also be added that Russia and British India suffer not only from the invasion of the drying winds of Central Asia, but also from the invasion of terrible nomadic hordes from there, i.e. both powers had and have the same enemies. Only the peaceful occupation of the Pamirs, only an alliance concluded on the grave, perhaps, of the ancestors of the Aryan (agricultural) peoples, is capable of pacifying the steppes, disarming the hordes, separating the nomads of Western Asia from the more warlike nomads of Central or Upper Asia, from where the former constantly received reinforcements and a revival of the warlike spirit. Pamir is a fortress protecting Constantinople, and as long as Pamir is in the hands of nomads or as long as the present possessors of Pamir do not conclude a real peace based on real security, on the regulation of atmospheric phenomena, until then Tsar-Grad, even if liberated, cannot consider itself insured against new invasions, just as all of Europe is not insured against a repetition of the Hun pogroms.

The means proposed by the article entitled "Disarmament", which does not recognize the possibility of disarmament without regulation, not only will not require a reduction in the naval forces of Britain and even of both Britains (American and European), but will rather require an increase in these forces to discharge the thunderstorm force of the thunderstorm ring itself by the combined forces of the two naval Britains and the land forces of Russia and China, united by an alliance of love for their ancestors. And only then will people from imaginary become real owners of both land and sea.

The article "Disarmament" indicates only a means against external international war, without touching upon the internal, class struggle, which is the real cause of external war. Current wars do not hide behind either religion or an idea, but cynically talk about profit, about trade interests, as the only cause of wars. Therefore, only the resolution of the internal, class, labor question (about capitalism) can completely destroy the cause of war. If external wars can be eliminated only by using troops to discharge the force of thunderstorms, to regulate air currents, whirlwinds, cyclones, from the thunderstorm ring to Murman (polar lights), then this is possible only with an alliance of the holders of land, Russia and China, with the holders of the ocean, the two Britains, American and European. For pacification, an alliance is needed between the holders (without regulation, however, of imaginary holders) of land and sea in the matter of knowledge not only of the ideal, but of the real. Karazin's apparatus replaces the destruction of the idols of Jupiter by turning his deadly thunderbolts to the restoration of life, first in the artificial form of industry, but not factory, for regulation gives each locality power (electric, thunderstorm), i.e. regulation requires the decentralization of industry. The power granted by the whole sky itself, this heavenly capital, enables local handicrafts to free themselves from urban industry without using the slightest violence. Handicraft industry is morally an equivalent replacement for storms, hurricanes, thunderstorms, and religiously it replaces the imaginary destruction of demonic power with real destruction, while the city factory requires exploitation, the exhaustion of nature, which produces floods and droughts. The factory, therefore, is immoral and irreligious both in means and in purpose; it creates idols in the form of the products of the factory industry, to which, one might say, modern humanity has given its soul. Vereshchagin's (not famous) article "On Demchinsky's discovery" (a method of predicting the weather) speaks of a "chest-to-chest" fight with the atmosphere, of course, only in a metaphorical or rhetorical sense, for "to a significant degree paralyze the destructive effects of drought and rainy season" means to fight not chest-to-chest, but in very indirect, indirect ways.

If Demchinsky's method predicts that 20 provinces will suffer drought, as happened in 1891, and in the other 20 there will be downpours, then, of course, this Prediction will be used by merchants, grain traders; but what kind of “chest-to-chest struggle” with the atmosphere will this be?!..

Vereshchagin’s article about the metaphorical struggle reminded us of the article “Disarmament,” which proposed to turn all current and all future instruments of destruction into instruments of salvation from hunger and epidemics, it was proposed to begin a real struggle of united rational x creatures with the unreasonable, blind force of nature. Vereshchagin wants, if not to destroy the army, if not to stop spending on armaments altogether, then at least to reduce them, while the author of "Disarmament" or the conversion of the instruments of destruction into instruments of salvation is not afraid of the spread of military service everywhere and to everyone, for only in this way can all peoples turn into a natural-testing force. Reading the article "Disarmament" carefully, one cannot help but admit that the author believes in the possibility of turning destruction into the return of life. The conversion of the army into a natural-testing force for the author of "Disarmament" is religion itself. When turning the war with one's own kind into a struggle with nature, there will be no need to humiliate Suvorov by comparing him with Nansen: Suvorov led an entire army through Swiss Greenland. If Suvorov's mental strength and selflessness were given to Nansen, both poles would already be open. As for the professor who bequeathed his corpse to be turned into illuminating gas, “to give light to humanity for two hours,” it must be answered that even rhetoric cannot be abused in this way! Of course, illuminating gas will be given to a poor man for two hours, and it will cost less than a kopeck. What can one demand from creatures from whom only a penny’s worth of illuminating gas remains!.. They say that there are guns that not only kill, but also bury, i.e., burn: so they too can give light to humanity in a night battle!.. We will not analyze the boorish morality that underlies the will of the American professor, a professor, of course, of ethics, but understood in the American sense. The American professor did not want to turn into a burdock or to be sent along with excrement to be used as fertilizer; so he wished to turn into illuminating gas. But where is the virtue in this that N. Vereshchagin admires? In the fifties of the 19th century, “European” was considered in Russia to be synonymous with the beautiful, and American ten times more beautiful; now, however, European is equivalent to vile, and American is ten times more vile.

1 Written on October 21, 1898

2 According to Voeikov, the famine in India is very profitable for England, so that it is not a matter of reducing famines that we need to worry about, but of increasing them!