The Pharisee in the gospel parable, indicating in his brief, but multi -component prayer to what he does and does not do,, however, did not calculate all his virtues. If you collect everything that is said in the Gospel of the Pharisees, then a very long prayer would turn out. Thus, the virtue of the Sabbath, which is not mentioned in the prayer of this Pharisee, is not mentioned in the prayer of the Pharisees, that is, the virtue of “not doing”, passed to the Novofarisans and accepted them so cordially that its use expanded far beyond the Old Testament: the Old Farisees were jealous of one Saturday a week; New lovers of the 8-hour day wish the 16-hour Saturday daily. The chief representative of Novofarisanism wanted to spread it to all the days of the week and to all hours of the day.

Another representative of Novofarisanism made holidays "days of pride." The third strict zealot of labor rights prohibits any (disinterested) assignment of labor and its results. The acquired by labor should, in his opinion, be exclusively belonging to the worker, that is, the property that excludes all, at least partial, at least temporary, unpaid alienation, because (he says) it would make the working slave in whose benefit alienation would happen.

This is sad, but perhaps true, while people themselves are alien to each other, while a person is not a person, but a beast. Only the restoration of kinship will destroy both selfishness with his property and altruism with his donation.

But the most important vice of the scientists of the Novofariseev is that they have lost any concept of the need for the participation of all reasonable creatures in the matter of knowledge; They forgot that science is a means, and not the goal, that scientists are not gentlemen, but servants, servants not people, but a popular, universally binding thing. To them, proud of their high sanitary “scientist”, less than anyone can degenerate into the slaves of capitalism and compete with them in profit and young lady.