The Slavic tribe, recognized by the West as “childish,” as primitive, living to this day in a clannish way of life, that is (from the Western point of view) as uncultured, remained what the Aryans were before the division into separate peoples. The very names “Aryans” and “Slavs” are identical and do not mean “venerable” and “glorious,” but “revering and glorifying the fathers,” just like the Semitic peoples, for “Sem” or “Shem” (glory) is also “glorious,” in the same sense just explained. The Slavs are similar to the Chinese and, in general, to the yellow tribe, which even now does not yet know how to give itself another name than “revering the fathers.” We, supposedly “immature,” recognize the truth of this characterization of the Slavic tribe; but in these quasi-vices we hope to see a great future.

In Kant, on the contrary, we see a representative of everything that is moribund, and we cannot help but admit that all European philosophy is either pre-Kantian or Kantian; there is no post-Kantian yet, for what is called post-Kantian is the same Kantian, that is, a philosophy that has forgotten what distinguishes the Gospel child - kinship; as a result of which this philosophy has ceased to be wisdom, of which the Gospel child is a model, but has become the vanity of prodigal sons.

Look at Kant's "Critique" from the point of view of kinship, and you will see that it does not stand up to this view. Autonomy and heteronomy can exist only in the absence of kinship. Even God's commandment is heteronomous to us if we consider God alien to ourselves. Of course, Kant is not the only one to blame for the unrelated state of the world, for the fact that we have forgotten our fathers, have ceased to be brothers, and that nature has ceased to be related to us, or has not yet become so. It has become unrelated because of our discord and inaction. But Kant should not have reconciled himself to this fact. He, just like the citizen of the French artificial republic, completely forgot about natural kinship and the possibility of restoring it; he never even thought about the latter, and therefore his whole philosophy is nothing but prejudice and superstition. Kant accepted the existence of two minds, not seeing in such a bifurcation the most profound immorality, which created two classes, completely alien to each other, the learned and the unlearned, as if two different races of people. The two opposed minds could not be reconciled in the third, aesthetic, which could only create dead likenesses of their dead fathers or create doubles (copies) that were of no use to themselves (the originals).

In general, Kant's philosophy is a product of the experience or history of universal civil relations, that is, a product of people who are strangers to each other, connected not by kinship but only by legal relations. This philosophy is an expression of a guard position, always ready to repel attacks, especially on personal dignity. Kant placed the consciousness of personal dignity at the basis of his moral philosophy: in order to preserve this dignity, a person must be ready to sacrifice his own and even someone else's life; a lie that humiliates a person is impermissible, according to Kantian morality, even for the sake of preserving one's own life and even someone else's. But, placing the beginning of human dignity at the basis of his morality. Kant does not notice that his entire morality consists of antinomies, which, from the point of view of his philosophy, are insoluble...<<1>>

1 For what dignity can there be for man in his slavery to blind force and in the denial of the possibility of liberation from it? Or what demand can be made not to lie, to be faithful to the truth, to a being incapable of knowing the truth?.. (V.A.K.)