(On the question of two minds)

Lutheranism, without realizing it, received its philosophical justification in Kant.<<1>> Kant, having recognized in the Critique of Theoretical Reason the questions of the existence of God and immortality as insoluble, in the Critique of Practical Reason declared the same questions to be solved only because man, as a moral being, needs both the existence of God and immortality, i.e. man, who supposedly exists for knowledge or thought alone, nevertheless needs an active being who could subordinate the world, i.e. the power that kills, to man and thus make the latter immortal. It is clear that such a naive solution convinced no one, satisfied no one: from practical reason one could and should have expected a solution, but a solution by deed, and not only by words, as it turned out with the Königsberg professor.

Albert Ritschl did the same in the field of theology in our time: he replaced theoretical, dogmatic theology with practical, moral theology. But Ritschl's narrow ethics could not answer the broad demands of dogmatics, narrow, despite the fact that it demanded the establishment of the Kingdom of God on earth and thus seemed to expand ethics. In reality, it also destroyed only poverty and discord, but left death in force. Ritschl did not include dominion over nature or triumph over death in ethics, he considered it a matter not of ethics, but of religion, and not even a matter, but only prayer, i.e., the desire to make God an instrument of one's will, and not to make oneself His instrument. Ritschlianism had to dare one more step: to expand ethics by turning the world of birth and death into resurrection and immortality. Ritschl did for Protestantism what Pope Leo XIII did for Catholicism, turning it into socialism. He did the same as Tolstoy, who denied all dogmas and put morality in their place, excluded enmity and left death. But to take the first step and not to take the second means to do nothing, because the Kingdom of God is a unification for resurrection, so that this is one and the same step. To prove that as long as there is death, there will also be poverty, and consequently, enmity - this means refuting Ritschl, and Tolstoy, and Leo XIII.

Pressed on all sides by questions, Ritschl had to (we are told, and his opponents say it rightly) create a special theological tactic, to give ambiguous answers to direct questions.

Kant should have turned the subjective questions of theoretical reason into projective demands of practical reason; Richl had to turn dogmas into commandments, rejecting in advance the boundaries of the universal cause arbitrarily set by learned superstition and prejudice of class science.

In the Triune God of dogmatic theology we have a model for the unification of all people, i.e. all living, all the sons of dead fathers, all rational beings against the irrational, deadening force, we have a model of unification for participation in the work of redemption, understood in the broad sense of returning life to the fathers, instead of the former displacing the latter, which we actually do, submitting to the law of blind force, although we recognize ourselves as rational. This sin makes us unworthy, alienates us from the God of the fathers, the God not of the dead, but of the living. Only unification for the return of life to the dead or slain will destroy alienation from God, i.e. will undoubtedly prove the existence of the Triune God, will prove everything in general undoubtedly, by a common cause. And if this is so, then in order to achieve complete proof, it is necessary to abandon disputes, for above all, unification is required; it is necessary, therefore, to implement the project of ending two quarrels: polemics and war.

1 “Back to Luther” among the theologians, “Back to Kant” among the philosophers instead of the call: “From Luther, from faith without work, and from Kant, from narrow work, to faith living in work, that is, to the all-encompassing work that unites all the sons of men, indicated by Christ.”