"Zarathushtra" is a deeply individual work; This is the story of the author’s inner life, his friendship, his ideal. And over all this dominates and all illuminates the image of his highest hopes and the ultimate goal.

The main idea of ​​the work is the idea of ​​the eternal return of all things. Mastering this “higher of all achievable formulas” dates back to August 1881. She was perceived "at an altitude of 6,000 feet above man and time." Is it not strange that such an insignificant height turned out to be sufficient to get dominance over time and become a superman? Only a native of Germany, where, according to Heine, in dirty weather, it was possible to take half of some kingdom on a boot, the 6000-footing height could seem so majestic ...

Before that, Nietzsche says, a revolution suddenly occurred in him, fundamentally changing his tastes, especially in music. He carried his "Zarathushtra" for 18 months and gave birth to him in February 1883 when Richard Wagner died. At the same time, “joyful science” arose, containing hundreds of instructions on the approach of “something incomparable”. At the end, the beginning of Zarathushtra is given, and in the penultimate part of the fourth book, Zarathushtra, we also find the beginning of the main ideas of the author.

These ideas arose in 1882-83, when he first experienced all the horror of loneliness, and together a strange desire to have a friend and at the same time thirst for superhumanism. “Even a deep person needs friends; It is necessary that he has God! ” But he did not find equally with him, and now, when he himself created a “perfect friend”, he appeared “Zarathushtra”; In it, Nietzsche created both his friend and God.

The first part of Zarathushtra is the product of the winter of 1882-83, cold and long, the period of illness and disappointment in friends, as well as in healing agents that he excessively trusted. In this winter, under such adverse conditions, “Zarathushtra” arose in the lovely, quiet bay of Rappallo near Genoa, “in the favorite place of King Frederick III, and therefore close to my heart,” explains Nietzsche, with whom the king saw and talked. The second part of the book (it says a lot about Rome) was over ten days; The first, third and last part took no more time.

Reading in the memoirs related to the subsequent years, inspiration and ecstasy when creating Zarathushtra, we could assume that more than one book “On the origin of the tragedy”, but this one has come out of the spirit of intoxication, not only by the primitive means of Noah or Waccha, but by products of the latest chemistry. Otherwise, it remains incomprehensible how such a joy could excite in the author, such gleeing is an endless return of lives, and therefore so many deaths! Either is it really so nice to make a professor millions of times, or to participate in the war the same number, or, finally, repeatedly languish in solitude, in resorts, dreaming of countless returns, without the slightest confidence in their reality, for a complete lack of evidence? ..