How did art begin, what did it become, and what should it be?
The solution to the question, "what should art be," will be the solution to the contradiction between a rational being and the blind force of nature, the solution to the most abnormal relationship between man and nature, the solution to the question of the subordination of a rational being to a blind force.
Will nature always remain a blind, deadening force, and will art be the creation of only dead likenesses? Is the bifurcation temporary or eternal?
Perfection is in the unity of nature and art.

Nature itself in man recognized the evil of death, recognized its imperfection. Therefore, the rebellion (upright position) of the living and the resurrection of the dead in the form of a monument is a natural act for a sentient and rational being. Art began with the rebellion and appeal to heaven of the living (who suffered a loss) and the restoration of the dead in the form of a monument. Prayer is the beginning of art. Prayer and the prayerful (upright) posture were the first act of art; this is theoanthropurgic art, which consists in the creation of man by God through man himself. Man is not only a product of nature, but also a work or creation of art. The last act of Divine creation was the first act of human art, for the destiny of man is to be a free being, and consequently self-created, since only a self-created being can be free. In this creation of himself, i.e., in rebellion and turning to heaven, man discovers God and God reveals himself to man, or more precisely: by discovering the God of the fathers, the being who has made such a discovery becomes the son of man, and not simply man alone; and only abstractly, forgetting the losses, can one say that the being who has discovered God has become man. When the vertical position turned into a guard position, then anthropourgic art was born, i.e. already secular, military, which, while making man on the one hand terrifying, and on the other - sensually attractive, tried to give itself a sacred meaning. To give oneself a terrifying or attractive appearance is an expression of secular art. Modern and world exhibitions are such an expression, for from the outside they must be an arsenal and inside - a store of whims in response to sexual desires. The terrifying became a sign of the ruling class, and the attractive became a sign of the "weaker" sex.

In the act of rebellion (in the vertical position) of the living and in the act of creating a likeness in the form of a monument to the dead (in theoanthropurgic art) man rose, rose above nature; producing from himself something terrifying or sensually attractive (anthropurgic art), man fell. <<1>>

If the beginning of art was divine, and at the present time art has become industrial-military, i.e. bestial and brutal, then the question arises: how to give art a direction that would correspond to its divine beginning? What should be opposed to the industrial-military exhibition of works of temptation and instruments of destruction? If the question - "what has art become" - is identical with the question "about the reasons for the non-brotherhood among people and the non-kinship relations of nature to people", - then the question about art - "what should it be" - will be a question about fraternal unification for the conversion of the blind force of nature into one controlled by reason of all resurrected generations, i.e. universal resurrection, being a complete restoration of kinship, will also give art the proper direction, will indicate its goal. The conversion of all worlds into those governed by the mind of resurrected generations, being a complete, strictest solution of the Copernican question, is at the same time completely identical with the primitive view, i.e. with the patrophication of heaven (with the conversion of heaven into the dwelling of the fathers), or with catasterization (with the transfer of the souls of the fathers to the stars), which is expressed in the temple by sculpture or painting. This primitive view for children is the simplest, consistent with the primitive view, explanation and solution of the Copernican question. The conversion of all worlds into those governed by the mind of resurrected generations is the highest goal for art as well.

1 For the Australians, red signified not only the entry into life, but also separation from life, which they did not want, however, to consider as separation. Some tribes covered the dead with shiny, rich, red ochre, and by this they wanted to denote not separation from life, but an imaginary return of life, i.e. they gave the dead the appearance of life. It is possible that the first paint with which primitive man painted himself was simply the blood of a killed animal or a defeated enemy. But as the victors began to use red ochre instead of blood, so perhaps the dead were also painted with blood: by opening their own blood and smearing it on the pale dead, the sons thought, one must assume, to return him to life.

Mourning originally meant, as it were, the deprivation of oneself of life by the living (co-dying), the deprivation of oneself of life, of course, imaginary. The desire to kill, to deprive oneself of life was expressed by beating oneself in the chest, inflicting wounds on oneself; later, this began to express the fear of losing one's life, the fear of wandering soul of the deceased, i.e. it turned into a mythical, so to speak, hygiene; and the painting of the deceased was done (later) so that the direct touch of the dead person would not cause illness. Thus, in the painting of the deceased and in mourning, sacred art was expressed.