To solve the question: to bow or not to bow (worship the Kremlin), on the one hand it is necessary to show in what spirit the worship (“three kings”) is performed, and on the other hand it is necessary to show the spirit and meaning of the subject of worship.

The spirit of worshipers (“three kings”) is revealed with a sufficiently fullness by the library of the daughter and sisters of the worshipers, “*2 >> as if deliberately placed under the embroidery of the ancestral museum, in order to explain the meaning of what is happening on the tower. The title of the essay, the author of which is well acquainted with the library of the Empress, << 1 "in a few words expressed the spirit of this worship. By his work, the author introduces the Russian intelligentsia, who knew only French rationalism (rejecting all worship and considering gratitude for the vice, for slave feeling) or German criticism (taught to worship only to himself, his “I”) - the author of his work, we repeat, acquaintance of the Russian intelligentsia with the German philosophy of faith, limiting the feeling that recognizes the existence of an invisible, but not considering the debt to the carrying in the visible.

The subject of worship, the Kremlin, with confidence in the invisible, considers the implementation of the chain in the visible world not only with its desire, but also the duty, considers this not one love, but also its duty.

A philosophy limited to feeling is learned by Slavophiles, although it was of Western origin. Rationalism and criticism were learned by our Westerners, who openly recognized in their non -self -state.

Having delved into the Kremlin’s significance, we will see that he did not reject the knowledge of the positive, but used it as a means of carrying out a chain in the all -in -law museum. In the formation of local museums, their recognition of themselves by means of implementing the meaning and purpose indicated by the Kremlin and prepared and designed by the Patround Museum would be expressed. The Kremlin, like the Third Rome, with confidence in the invisible, in the existence of a sample of unanimity and consent, calls, collects and unites the sons of human for the implementation of the chased by them, that is, resurrection.

*1 cm. The previous article and a note to it (V. A. K.).

    2 Empress Alexandra Feodorovna, daughter of the Prussian king Friedrich Wilhelm IV and sisters of Emperor Wilhelm I. Her library, composed of the best works of the classical period of German literature, was transmitted to the Rumyantsevsky museum, where it is placed in the hall, located just under the illegal museum, on which the “worship of the three tsars” occurred ” Kremlin. (V.A. K.)

1 Philosophy of feeling and faith in her relationship to rationalism of the 18th century and to the critical philosophy of V.A. Kozhevnikov. Moscow, 1897.