Nietzsche, as the last philosopher of the disunifier-unifier, is the last thinker, who is followed by the doer

The unconditionality of the end of the world, its tragic destruction, or the infinite number of ends of the world (if we accept the assumption of "eternal returns") - this is the outcome of the teaching of Nietzsche, the worshipper of the Antichrist, who forces Zarathustra to preach the "good of war".

This teaching is the complete opposite of active Christianity: active Christianity demands that the weapons of war be converted into weapons of salvation from hunger and plagues (Matt. XXIV, 7); in other words, salvation from hunger and plagues will also free us from war. Anti-Christianity, on the contrary, speaking out for the unconditionality of the end of the world, praises war and legitimizes it. If the title of Nietzsche's work "The Origin of Tragedy" is replaced by the following: "The Origin of the Tragedy of Life", then with this new title in the work of Nietzsche's Black Prophet, anti-Christianity will be identical with the catastrophe of the world, with its unconditional end, or with the eternal return of the ends of the world.

On the contrary, the project of schools-temples, built in fulfillment of the commandment of the risen Lord, given to the disciples, who need vision and touch for confirmation, the commandment "to teach, baptizing", put in place of prophecy - this project presupposes the conventionality of prophecies about the end of the world.

The project of turning blind force into one controlled by reason and feeling of the sons of men, by will and love for the fathers-ancestors, in other words, the project of brotherhood through adoption for the fulfillment of the duty of the Eucharist to the God of the fathers - this project is directed against the Nietzschean decadents, against the False Zarathustra.

And Christianity knows the superman, that is, the new man, reborn by water and spirit; but this is a rebirth for eternal life, since the reborn is freed from sin, the cause of death. Supermanhood will not be in the mystical, but in the material sense, resurrection and immortality.

If the title of Schopenhauer's main work, "The World as Will and as Representation," were replaced by the more correct title, "The World Not as Will to Life, but as Bondage to Death and as a Project for Liberation from this Bondage, that is, as Will to Resurrection," then Schopenhauer's student Nietzsche should have put (above his collected works) the title "The World as Will Striving for Power," [and] this expression would already contain a recognition of the bondage of the will. With this title, Nietzsche would have precisely defined his attitude toward his teacher and at the same time would have clearly shown that, although he begins his work "Beyond Good and Evil" with a chapter on the prejudices of scientists, he himself does not emerge from the ranks of scientists, is not freed from prejudices, and, like a typical "scholar," does not understand the matter, replacing it with reasoning, and not with a plan or project. Thanks to such a substitution, he becomes an impudent, unbearable chatterbox. Not a single indication of through whom and how the world will at least begin to govern itself, for which, of course, both labor and knowledge are needed, how to coordinate the coexistence of both sentient (rational) beings and (unfeeling) irrational force, and [how to reconcile] the dependence of the former on the latter. Where is the way out of this abnormal state?

It is easy to understand how difficult it is for a person thirsty for action to read Nietzsche's chatter. The arrogant teacher of the wisdom of imaginary self-will remained a disciple of Schopenhauer: he did not replace the [phantom] will with [real] action; for him, power is manifested in an oligarchy of privileged ("supermen"), and not in an autocracy uniting everyone in the work of turning blind force into force governed by reason. (And could a thinker who did not understand love, who did not value love, be a preacher of unification!) “A new commandment I give unto you,” he says, and you expect that he will say to you further: “Be merciful!”; but instead you hear from the sly vulgarian: “Be firm!” In other words: “love is weakness!” “Do not love one another! Therefore you will know that you are my disciples, because you will not support one who is falling!” Become [therefore] helpers, accomplices of the merciless, insensitive forces of nature!

“Superman over his own kind” is not only an immoral concept, but also a glaring contradiction, an absolute absurdity: either they are not similar to him, or (if they are similar) he cannot be above them. He cannot, and does not dare, if human dignity is to be respected; to say that "to live for others means to live for one's flock" - what is that if not to call man a beast?! But the supposed superman, who degrades his fellows to the level of beasts and, not knowing pity for them, elevates himself thereby to something higher - will he not already be a beast? On the contrary, the son of dead fathers, for whom the common cause with all his fellows is resurrection, such a being is no longer an animal; he is the son of man, fulfilling the will of the Son of Man: "that all may be saved"! In the anti-gospel of Zarathustra there is a "temptation of compassion", a picture rare in its falsity: in a dark, lifeless place, where even snakes expire, in the Kingdom of Death, the cries of the "higher men" called Zarathustra, this compassionate beast, from his cave. In this Kingdom of Death he meets a monster of almost inhuman appearance and does not recognize it himself. For Zarathustra to see himself was almost the same as to see the devil. However, Zarathustra was not killed by this sight; he had to recognize in him his double, the same one who, in the person of the Jews and pagans, betrayed the God-man to suffering and death, who considered redemption a possible thing and did not consider it humiliating to be the son of man. The Son of Man did not want to be a superman; the supermen of His time, covering up their heartlessness with respect for the great misfortune (?), passed by the Samaritan, "who fell among the robbers," by the paralytic, by the blind man, by the dead Lazarus, and did not understand or did not want to understand that everyone must be called to the common cause of salvation, in which, of course, there can be no disrespect for compassion. Nietzsche with Zarathustra wants to see in the monster (from the Kingdom of Death) the dying human race, from which, under the guise of respect for misfortune, he turns away, without even thinking why redemption is impossible for humanity, that is, resurrection, participation in which should raise [the dignity] of all [people]. The Son of Man, having risen Himself, called everyone to participate in the work of resurrection. The prodigal son, not remembering kinship, Nietzsche slandered Christ, saying that the Savior called only the poor and unfortunate, and not all who call themselves sons and men, not excluding, therefore, the prodigal sons, who call themselves supermen.

To understand all the lies in the picture of "ideals manufactured on earth", one must remember that the prophecy about the end of the world and the Last Judgment is a conditional threat, expressing the wish that everyone would come to the understanding of the truth. Remembering this, we can go down to the dark workshop to which Nietzsche invites us, where he wants to hide the [true] matter with an artificially produced darkness and, having cast darkness, interprets in his own way the voices and words that come from it. He declares that here “weakness is somehow falsely elevated to virtue, and impotence to kindness,” insensitivity to insult turns out to be the cowardice or virtue of the weak; the lack of strength to take notice turns into a reluctance to take revenge, or even into forgiveness. When we notice that these gentle people, through impotence, “do not know what they are doing,” we ask to illuminate them, “sitting in darkness,” with at least one ray of light, and what do we see then? — Crosses, crosses and many other instruments of execution... And these are all "cowards", all "weak", who would only have to say one word to become free!..

Reading this fragmentary philosophy, obviously powerless to become whole, we not only see that the author of the treatise "Beyond Good and Evil" does not at all go beyond both and even makes us despair of the possibility of stepping beyond their limits, beyond the limits of the current limited morality. The seminarian, like lackeys who are always more aristocratic than their masters, reproaches his age for plebeianism and democracy, obviously not being able to rise above these two vices: he himself does not go beyond the limits of domination and slavery, aristocracy and democracy, although he speaks all the time about supermanhood. While he himself places power above all else and extols tyrants, he condemns philosophers for their tyrannical impulses, and spiritual ones for their desire for power, for the creation of the world.

Beyond good and evil, beyond birth and death, the "endless returns" must be transformed into one universal cause, into a universal resurrection. It will truly be beyond both imaginary good and real evil.

The evaluation of human actions and deeds by their consequences, and not by their origin, in agreement with all of Europe and Germany in particular, but in contrast to China, where the distinction or shame of children falls on parents and ancestors, Nietzsche calls the pre-moral period. Meanwhile, such an assessment is super-moral, for according to it, rational beings are held responsible for all the evil done by an irrational force, which, of course, is beyond the bounds of that vulgar morality to which our philosopher adheres, who desires only one thing: not to be like others and especially not like everyone else. To judge morality by its origin means not to demand intelligence from people, means to separate the moral from the intellectual. To recognize the intellectual as optional for man, to recognize ignorance as tolerable... and not to notice that nature punishes with the death penalty precisely for ignorance!.. If ignorance is tolerable, then, of course, there is no need for universal compulsory education. It is clear that the human race assumed such a great responsibility only when there was no commandment: “Know thyself!”, that is, “know only thyself!”<<1>> National morality, while taking responsibility for the consequences, does not renounce judgment of actions by their origin: and in China the criminals themselves are punished to a higher degree than their relatives. [In reality, however] the entire human race is guilty of every offense; and therefore the highest morality stands outside the European, aristocratic, Nietzschean morality: it demands universal salvation. If universal salvation is not achieved, then the punishment will be universal. So we see this in Christian morality, according to which some will be punished with eternal torment, and others - by contemplating these torments.

Nietzsche, morbidly afraid of being like others, does not even know how to free himself from Schopenhauer's myth of "will", which he makes strive for power. Of course, one can imagine that the will in the whole world, in the entire universe, has mastered itself; then the subsequent would not absorb the previous, the descendants would not turn the ashes of their ancestors into their food, but would restore those absorbed. But what is left with the myth of will (that is, with a will that is only imaginary, fictitious) and [itself] the means of restoration would turn out to be only a mythical, mystical art. But Nietzsche did not even reach mythical art: he [in general] could not understand that the human race, united, is capable of turning its "devenir"*1>> into "revenir".<<*2"

1 Note in the margin: Aphorism 80 (in "Beyond Good and Evil"): "what becomes understandable ceases to interest (to concern us). What did that god want to say who advised: "know thyself!" Was it not that man would cease to be interested in himself and become objective?" Nietzsche, therefore, admits that in "know thyself!" lies "know only thyself!"

*1 Becoming (French).

2 Return (French).