The day is welcome, from the century, an imminent sky, glee will only come when the earth, the darkness of generations has absorbed, with the heavenly sons of love and knowledgeable and controlled, will return it to it absorbed and inhabit them, now soulless, coldly and, as it were sadly looking at us, looking at us, looking at us; When, collecting and reviving the dust of those that gave us or rather, they gave our lives, we will no longer turn this ashes to ourselves and descendants, which we were forced by the division of worlds and the need to live with means accumulated by our small planet. The knowledge of the substance and his forces restored past generations, capable of diving their body from elementary elements, will inhabit worlds and destroy their discord ... Then the Sun will truly give up, which the people now think of seeing a bright resurrection on the Easter morning; The numerous choirs of stars will rejoice. The illusion of poets, personifying or tearing the worlds, will become a truth. But personification or more precisely - the cartridge will be given no longer by thought, not by imagination, but by deed. The premature patronage, living in folk and non -in -law poetry, is clearly verbal that the day is the desired tea and peoples, the spocation of the eyelids is expected. This day, the Lord will create his own through us, will not be produced by an imaginary movement of the Sun, not the real movement of the earth, but by the aggregate action of the sons who loved the god of the fathers and the fulfilled deep compassion for all who have left. The Earth will become the first star in the sky, moving not by the blind power of the fall, but by the mind, restoring and preventing the fall and death. There will be nothing distant when, in the aggregate of the worlds, we will see the totality of all past generations. << 1>> Everything will be native, not someone else's; Nevertheless, the width, heights and depths of immense, but not overwhelming, not terrifying, but capable of satisfying unlimited desire, unlimited life, which so frighten the current exhausted, painful, buddhic generation will open. This life is always new, despite its antiquity, this spring without autumn, morning without evening, youth without old age, resurrection without death. However, then there will be not only autumn and evening, there will be a dark night, as the hell of suffering will remain, in the current and past life of the human race the former, but it will remain only in the view, as an experienced grief, the elevating value of the bright day of the countryside. This day will be marvelous, wonderful, but not wonderful, for the resurrection will be a matter of a miracle, but knowledge and general labor.

The day is welcome, the day of the century will be God's command and human execution.

1 Universal date. This is the great future that awaits the past, if the present understands its purpose, business, goal.