Copernican art or resurrection preached with generations of the first century of Christianity, in which the XIX century saw some supposedly likeness.

Of course, the century of searching for a new God and a new person, a superman, as we see with Nietzsche, with Ibsen, Hauptmann, Zuderman, has a resemblance to the first century of our era. But if these seekers of the innovation show the old god Triune, the god of fathers. Which serves as a model of much unity, unification and requires our aggregate, from the brotherhood of the sons of the circulation of the entire universe to the temple for our fathers, which would be the highest work of Copernican art, the new God -players should admit that they did not know the old god at all. The current universe has become blind, goes to destruction, to chaos because a person, believing Satan, condemned himself to knowledge without action, which turned the Tree in the Tree of the Cross; The Cross Tree, attracting everyone, unites everyone in circulation of knowledge into a matter, which leads to resurrection, to the return of life, i.e. the tree of knowledge again combines with the Tree of Life.

Ibsen and Gauptmann have new people “work in vain”, creating a new temple, because their temple is only mental, symbolic. What an abyss lies between a Christian new man and a new man Ibsen or a superman Nietzsche! Ibsen’s novelty of a person and Nietzsche’s height is a lie itself. Goebel’s alofern to the question of Judith: “And if the sky sends his lightning to hit you?” He answered: "Then I praise my hands, as if he had ordered her to hit me." Shtokman and all the heroes of Ibsen, accusing everyone of lies - no matter how fair these accusations of others are - do not notice their own false position at all; Not to notice the lies in these new people and superman means to express extreme blinding. Shtokman demands from a society living in a resort to declare it deadly and thereby depriving themselves of their means of life! .. These heroes, emphasizing their imaginary dissimilarity with the majority, take this dissimilarity for superiority, not noticing the very deep similarity, expressed in the fact that all people, not excluding the protesters themselves, the sons of the deceased fathers. A new person, revived in a Christian, came from what was given in the call “Rent!”, And the superman from what lurks in the council: “Know yourself”, i.e., know only yourself. The inevitability of lies is determined by the environment, i.e. the outside world and heredity. Consequently, it is necessary either to recognize the perfect impossibility of exemption from evil, or to recognize the need for universal unification for resurrection, because only in the regulation of the outside world is the possibility of exemption from submission to the power of the environment and only resurrection will be healed from bad heredity.