Speaking of endless passive, unconscious "returns," and not of a single, active, conscious return—resurrection—is it not the height of inconsistency, absurdity, and illogicality to utter, as Nietzsche makes his Zarathustra, the following prediction: "You must once again, and an innumerable number of times, experience this life!" Think: reason commands us to experience irrational states, commands us to deprive ourselves of reason, in order to acquire it again later, and so on—ad infinity!..

Accepting or assuming passive returns, man, like any thing or phenomenon, cannot help but return; but he returns, according to Nietzsche, without being conscious of his return. But if so, then for conscious beings returns do not exist at all. If we assume that there are as many of them as there have been, countless experiences, then this will be only an assumption, which can be both recognized and refuted - one of those assumptions that perhaps all supermen could accept, if only supermen are equivalent to superstition. "The eternal hourglass of existence is constantly being refilled, and with it you, insignificant speck of dust," says the pastor's son (Nietzsche). Why then you, and not I with them, an insignificant speck of dust?.. And why can't insignificant specks of dust (men and supermen), possessing consciousness of their (individual, isolated) smallness, unite and form a force that is conscious of itself and governs itself?.. Why won't the act of "pouring from empty to empty", as it is now, then become consciously regulated and meaningful?.. Why, we ask, if we admit the previous, senseless assumption, not admit this meaningful one?.. After all, only by admitting it (this second option), the whole assumption about returns in general, this entire hypothesis, so far arbitrary, could find either its confirmation or its refutation. The assumption of the possibility of unity between grains of sand, the unity of the material, has, of course, an incomparably more solid foundation (than the opposite assumption). To rely on the hypothesis of passive returns or to despair from it is the ultimate pinnacle of madness and absurdity. But the unfortunate Nietzsche is so frightened by this phantom that he plans to recreate life for its sake; in order to have the desire to live such a life, he had to make it worthy of desire, divine. If Nietzsche had not been possessed by lackey-aristocratic morality and philistine erudition, which does not recognize reason not only in the urban and intelligent rabble, but also in the peasants who have not been subjected to the influence of the city (he himself, however, admired the noble-Polish "liberum veto", and not the Russian "secular" unity, which created a whole temple in a single day!), he would naturally have come to the doctrine of the unification of all the living, all the sons for the resurrection of all the fathers. The doctrine of resurrection is, of course, democratic, in the sense of universalism; but it is higher than any aristocratic, for it makes the resurrected not better, but good, to which the vain Mr. Nietzsche was unable to rise. He replaced the Christian teaching about heaven and hell, about saints and sinners, expressed in a threatening and conditional sense, with a division into supermen and scum, a parody of heaven and hell. And this caricature is supposed to make life worthy, divine! Such is the apotheosis of life and man!..

It seemed cowardly to Nietzsche not to accept the disgusting teaching about returns, and he accepted it; but under the apparent improvement there was only an even greater deterioration: the assumption of passive returns forced him to resort to a new hypothesis - about the superman.

The question of the "superman," if "man" is to be recognized as the "final form," will be a question of outstanding genius exceptions and of the creation and education of such individuals from among the human race, which remains unchanged. Having made a selection, some must be destined for improvement, and others abandoned to their fate.

But Nietzsche, as a learned philistine, is completely incapable of understanding the meaning and value of action: instead of concentrating it in conscious and volitional beings, he leaves it to a weak-willed and blind force. The superman under such conditions is nothing more than a happy accident, the result of individual fortunate cases from the most diverse localities and among the most diverse cultures. In the whole process of the formation of the superman, it is not families, not nations, not the majority and not all people that are meant, but only a few individuals, exceptional individuals - geniuses. And only to these privileged, individual personalities does the learned philistine grant the privilege of action: “true philosophers are rulers and legislators; they proclaim: “so it must be!” (that is, as it seems to them); they determine the aspirations and goals of people; they touch the future with a creative hand; their knowledge is creativity; their creativity is legislation”; all this taken together (we will add) is nothing other than the desire for domination, that “will to power” which is so dear to Nietzsche.