What is metaphysics for the Germans, for the British and French agnosticism. From this latter, it is now possible to display entire religious systems. What most believers sees the manifestation of divine will, in the same positivists, according to agnostic belief, recognize the action of an unknowable force spilled in the entire universe.

In this thought of Spencer, not only a metaphysical, but also a whole religious system, similar to the one that Kant brought out of his, denying all theology, systems.

If the British and French have religious systems, and the Germans have metaphysical ones, then this is because the Protestantism itself is already a transition to a metaphysical system.

Since the manifestation of the unknowable in the universe is allowed, is it possible to stop in his knowledge? Unknowable to us, is it known for itself? ..

If nature, according to Wundt, is the self -development of the spirit, and the spirit is the self -development of nature, then self -development is only a transition from blind to conscious; The fullness of consciousness or spirit with such a development cannot be achieved. It is necessary that self -development becomes an action; That is, it is necessary that consciousness knows or preliminarily represent what it should become; It is necessary that it can control the fact that there is a blind person in the soul (without separating nature from the spirit).

Such a thing can only be done in the kingdom of the spirit, that is, in the combination of souls of individual, but not alien to each other, for which the total organism (Gesammtorganismus) is only a temporary, semi -conscious form, for the combined organism contains both dominance and struggle, that is, the displacement of the youngest senior, as well as the collective spirit, contains hatred. It is necessary that the aggregate organism does not deceive itself with an imaginary unity, but realize in itself the actual alienation between individual souls and even more alienation between spirit and nature and, as a result of this, the dominance of the latter over the first.

But the fact of the opposite between nature and the spirit indicates only the possibility for the spirit to rule by nature.