In the vertical position, as in all self-rebellion, man, or the son of man, is the artist and the artistic work-temple… This is the aesthetic interpretation of being and creation, and not only aesthetic, but also sacred. Our life is an act of aesthetic creativity.

The first rise, or vertical position, or the rebellion of the sons, caused by the death of the fathers, is a tragic position; this is the ethical-aesthetic interpretation of the creation of man by God through the sons of men themselves. History is the creation of suffering, tormented [not a deity, but] humanity. Not Bacchus, therefore, but the son must be placed at the basis of tragedy or history; Apollo must be replaced by the sons of men in their totality.

Tragedy (i.e., the depiction of the death or ruin of the fathers) arose from the spirit of music, if this music is an expression of sorrow for the losses of those born who gave birth and especially for the fatal displacement of the fathers by the sons. Such music was not a work of intoxication, but of sobriety, death laid the foundation for sobriety; but this tragedy will already be Christian, not pagan, not occurring from intoxication. If Nietzsche's work "The Origin of Tragedy" is a solution to the problem of the origin not only of art in general, but of the world itself, then we must not forget that the first page of the book, called by us the book of Genesis, and by other European peoples the word Genesis, i.e. birth, can be called an aesthetic interpretation of the origin of the world-world, if aesthetics is the science of creativity, for in the book of Genesis God is presented as an artist, a Creator, an architect of the universe. If the living, personal or Triune God is transformed into an abstract principle, into an indefinite aspiration or desire, or, even worse, into a pure or impure impulse, into lust, then we get Schopenhauer and Nietzsche with the Bacchic principle of the latter. And this will be either a metaphysical revelation or abstract thinking, metaphysics. All this is important for people of thought, who do not want to leave this area for action. For people of action there is no need to go beyond the limits of physics, understood in a broad astronomical sense (since the earth is included in the program of tasks of astronomy). And on the earth a constant tragedy is played out: the displacement of fathers by sons, or the grief of the born over the loss of those who bore them, or parents. Of course, our humanistic age, the age of bridegrooms and brides, does not recognize grief over the death of parents and does not grieve at all about death, recognizing it as necessary; but at the same time it cannot reconcile itself to it.

All pagan religions, philosophical systems and works of art were manifestations of intoxication, deception, wandering. If intoxication was at the basis, then Apollonian images were not reality. Humanism, which hid from itself dying and birth (sonship), was therefore not a representation of reality.

What could be more tragic than the situation of sons forced to devour their fathers! This is not even anthropophagy; this is already patrophagy, father-eating! The tragedy, however, will disappear if sons and fathers are turned into some kind of drunken visions, into drunken dreams.

In Christianity, with its basic concept of the son of man, which required unification for resurrection, there was sobriety. The images here were not representations, not dreams, but projects.

[Thus, the foundations of the worldview, as well as the meaning and purpose of life are presented:]

For the "sons", the "born" - as polytheism and mythical patrofication or patromorphism.

For "man" - as deism (pantheism) and personification or anthropomorphism.

For the "sons of men" - as the Trinity and real patrophication, or brotherhood for fatherhood.

For the "sons" separated on earth - as polytheism and patrophication in heaven, or as patrophication of heaven - in the Ptolemaic worldview.

For "man", united externally, abstractly on earth - polytheism with patrophication in heaven, in the Copernican worldview is replaced by Deism, spiritualism, and, finally,

For the sons of men, united internally and externally in the image of the Divine Trinity - the unification becomes the multi-unity of all worlds through resurrected generations as a manifestation of the extra-mundane, otherworldly Trinity in this world.