For Nietzsche, as a scholar, history is a book, not a matter, not life; just as Nietzsche, as an artist, knows only either a dead likeness of the plastic arts, or only sound and its combinations, evoked by them without matter, guided by them. Recognizing in the plastic arts only a snapshot, he, together with Schopenhauer, sees in music the full manifestation of will, a thing in itself, and does not even notice that music necessarily requires matter, and that only a universal matter, regulating the blind, generative and deadening force, can be a full expression of will, but no longer as a manifestation of lust, not as intoxication. Only music that unites people in one choir, in one common matter, accelerating and facilitating this matter, can be called music that is truly meaningful, fruitful, creative, although still artificial. The highest, natural music for the sons of men would be that under the sounds of which the scattered particles of the fathers' bodies would gather, would be composed into their bodies and would evoke in the sons themselves that force which now manifests itself in sensual birth. The music of the universal cause would not only counteract the absorption of the previous by the subsequent (by the sons of the fathers), but would also be expressed in the restoration of the previous, the fathers.

Nietzsche can be recognized as a scientist and an artist; but he cannot be recognized not only as a son of man, but even as a man in the active sense. Realizing that he is powerless to resist tragic death, he wants to show that he himself desires death and even finds some kind of valor in this. Is this not the height of vanity and vulgarity?! Christian aesthetics is expressed in the realization of what is desired and in the life of the future century.

What should Nietzschean aesthetics be?

In contrast to the origin of Greek, i.e. pagan tragedy, we must place the Christian tragedy of Great Friday, Saturday and Resurrection, or Easter of Passion and Easter of Resurrection. Tragedy arises from the weeping and lamentations of sons and daughters over their fathers on their Great Fridays and Saturdays, which, of course, has nothing in common with the Bacchic origin of Greek tragedy, since these orgies must be considered a distortion of lamentations. When we hear the contrition of people who do not have sons and daughters to mourn them, then by mourning we mean exorcism and burial, i.e. resurrection.

In Tolstoy, the tragic (the crime in the "Kreutzer Sonata") also arises from the spirit of music; and the theoretical (according to Nietzsche) corresponds to Tolstoy's moral, but not a true moral, but only a metaphorical, not a real resurrection, but only repentance, which does not correct anything, as in Nekhlyudov's "Resurrection". But what is the point of it, and what is the need for such a fruitless Tolstoyan resurrection, this only internal revolution in Nekhlyudov? His resurrection shows a person that a crime and even a mistake are irreparable.

Tolstoy's teaching on art and the example of the application of this teaching, given in his "Resurrection", is the work of a man completely devoid of philosophical sense, a man amazingly frivolous. With such an infantile or childish understanding of spring, with the description of which the story begins, it is impossible to understand resurrection properly. Tolstoy read Schopenhauer and did not understand that the will (Schopenhauer) is lust, especially strongly manifested in the spring; whereas Schopenhauer's disciple Nietzsche understood the meaning of spring, as is evident from the following words: "Thanks to the intoxicating drink, under the influence of which the speech of all primitive peoples and nations took the form of a hymn, or thanks to the approach of spring, which had a powerful influence on all nature and inspired it with lustful desires, those aspirations corresponding to the spirit of Dionysus were awakened, which, being intensified to a strong degree, bring everything subjective in man to complete self-forgetfulness." Nekhlyudov and Katyusha also reached this self-forgetfulness in the spring, and brought into the world a creature who, without even reaching the exit from self-forgetfulness, lost not only consciousness, but also life. They themselves awoke from the sleep inspired by Apollo, from the sleep in which they enjoyed the seeming, the visible, and finally became Socrates, but not Christians; they came to the Socratic resurrection. In the poem “The Call”<<*1>> the words “Brother, wake up!” refer to the Apollonian-Bacchic dream, to the pagan night and to the day of the imaginary resurrection, and demand not the Socratic resurrection, but the real one. True, to many the replacement of the resurrection by a general resurrection, i.e. by everyone of all, seems presumptuous, an attempt to usurp the right of the divine, allegedly alien to man. But to expose this error, it is enough to compare the Aryan myth of Prometheus, recalled by the same Nietzsche, with the tale of the Fall: in the first, man is punished for appropriating divine properties to himself; in the second, he is punished for curiosity, for lying, for deception. And Christ is punished for appropriating divine properties to man. But by whom is He punished? By man himself! If, therefore, to some pious Christians participation in the work of resurrecting people seems to be an appropriation of divine properties, then it is obvious that then in this case Christians become pagans, mixing the Christian God with Zeus, the punisher of virtues and the thirst for light and knowledge.

But for those who do not fall into such a delusion, for them the call to awakening is a call to a real resurrection. With such an awakening, "when we, the dead, awaken", i.e. sleepy, in an Apollonian-Bacchic sleep, wake up, then the question arises, not resolved either by Ibsen about Rubek's attitude to Irene, or by the author of "The Resurrection of the Gods" about Leonardo da Vinci's attitude to Gioconda. The tragic dilemma that confronts Rubek and Irena: the impossibility, on the one hand, of being satisfied with only a semblance of life in a work of art, and on the other hand, with life itself, if it is limited only by sensuality - this dilemma, of course, not resolvable even by the blind force of a deadly avalanche, can be resolved by the power of reason, the conscious work of all people, the work of resurrection, turning blind desires into re-creative forces capable of creating not only a semblance of life from stone or on canvas, but from the dust into which living beings are turned, to return to life the very being, those from whom life was once received by sensual means, not satisfied either with sensual happiness or with a single artistic semblance of life. Why are Rubek and Irene, Leonardo and Gioconda, having created a work of art in stone and on canvas, not content with this likeness as dead, but also do not dare to give free rein to lust, blind and unconscious? Because, of course, the sexual act is a crime (a sin for those who recognize sinfulness), a sin against knowledge and art itself, just as modern art, the creation of an idol, is a sin both against life and against knowledge; and both are sins against the God of the fathers. Man in this act is the instrument of a blind force; he does not know and does not control either what preceded this act or what followed it. The fruit of unconscious passion repeats in the womb in general terms all the vices represented by the animal kingdom, the product of a force not governed by reason. When it comes into the world, the fruit will be the likeness of its parents and ancestors. Sexual sin will only be atoned for when the regulative form of the ability to give a likeness to ourselves and to our fathers, and to what follows this act, is given, i.e.: this will already be a conscious reproduction of parents to immortal life, and at the same time a condition for one's own immortality. In such a decision, not fatal, but consciously voluntary, lies our goal, the goal of all the sons of men, which the 19th century so painfully and passionately sought. In it, and only in it, will humanity find the solution to its scientific, artistic and moral problems.

It goes without saying that the realization of such a goal requires the closest and necessarily related, universal and fraternal union, as this very matter is common to all and native, closest to each. Only such a matter can create a union, i.e. the only possible form of pacification. Whatever the difficulties of the task, nevertheless, already before, in our Russian history, there were examples of unification that was impeccable, disinterested, completely voluntary, even if short-lived. Let us consider the construction of ordinary churches. The impulse that created them no longer came from the spirit of Bacchism, not from intoxication and lust, but from the will in its purest manifestation, that is, from the spirit of sobriety; in other words, from the complete opposite of how the pagan chorus and tragedy arose. Of course, in ancient Russia there were also frequent examples of strife and massacres inspired by evil passions, the spirit of intoxication, such as, for example, the Novgorod riots. But the unification of spiritual and physical forces that manifested itself in the construction of ordinary churches was an even more gratifying phenomenon. Their formation, perhaps, was also accompanied by singing (vocal music), like the march to Trinity-Sergius in 1892, the year of the 500th anniversary of the death of St. Sergius. <<1>> But these pious, chaste choirs were the complete opposite of the Bacchic choirs, which turned pagan celebrations, Dionysia and Saturnalia, into hideous orgies. Thus, the question of ordinary churches is contrasted not only with cases of mass religious ecstasy, the so-called "revivals" of modern times, but also with all the orgies of the ancient and Eastern worlds, ancient and modern.

*1 Here we mean the poem by V.A. Kozhevnikov, written on the thoughts of Nikolai Fyodorovich and published in the newspaper "Don", 1898, in N 84:

Appeal

Brother, wake up! crimson dawn

The east began to shine:

To eternal life, to a new life

The prophet of the day calls

All—to the tireless feat

Of common labor,

So that the desired day may come to us,

A bright day when

The forces driven by knowledge

And the common labor

For those sleeping in the gloom of the grave

They will recreate life,

And, shaking off the shackles of decay

From the ashes of the dead,

Will return the day of resurrection

To the sons of the fathers.

(V.A.K.)

1 Of course, unfortunately, not the whole crowd turned into a choir (vocal), and it could not turn into a choir at the present time. Assumption: to unite the crowd in the construction of a custom the Holy Trinity Church on Vaganki, where there had already been such a church in ancient times; then, by the Spirit of singing or the funeral service, which had become a prayer service, to lead to the relics of St. Sergius, and, returning from there, to consecrate the Vaganki Church, this assumption could not take place, because the current crowd was not the old Russia of the forest country, where everyone was a carpenter. But if the matter had taken place, then it would have been only an image of the human race, which had become a funeral choir on earth, like a cemetery, on this moving stage, near the hearth, the center of power, which the funeral service, which had become the knowledge of this power, should transform into a resurrecting one.