Beyond the present darkness and light, beyond the two superstitions, the two obscurantisms, the two ignorances, the learned philologist (Nietzsche), being an eyewitness of a terrible tragedy in which two peoples, like slaves and instruments of the blind force of nature, destroy each other, not seeing their common enemy, this learned contemplator of an insane event writes not about this Franco-German tragedy, in which he himself was a participant as a medic, but writes "about the origin of Greek tragedy from the spirit of music", or singing, from intoxication to oblivion of death leading and producing war and death. This school, university erudition hides from him the reality, the history, before his eyes and in himself flowing. In "Untimely Thoughts", i.e. at the very time when Germany was reveling in its bloody victories and speculating on the billions it had stolen, Nietzsche, in connection with Strauss, wars against philistinism, of which he himself is most guilty (as is obvious from the above), and contrasts Strauss with Schopenhauer, a pure scholar, a contemplative par excellence, who even abandoned his professorial activity in order to devote himself entirely to inactive contemplation. A scholar for whom the world is an idea, and life is a lust, which he calls will, not noticing the dependence-involuntary, although involuntary, too, is weighing on him. If, in addition to bestial reality, only contemplation remains, then the natural consequence of such a life will be denial, a general negative attitude toward all life, toward the life of the whole world, whereas there should be denial only of one's own philistinism and urban, tavern life. And it is this Schopenhauer that his follower Nietzsche makes an "educator" ("Schopenhauer als Erzieher"). It is desirable that such an educator should always be "untimely". Nietzsche condemns the human race to serve such and such people!..

Only because he does not understand history as life can he speak of the harm of history, of its "excessiveness"; whereas, on the contrary, we should blame ourselves for the forgetfulness that has turned us into vagabonds, forgetting our kinship and deprived of the goal that could unite everyone for a common cause. In general, Nietzsche's objections to history already point to such an old age that it passes into childishness; this is already the last "renaissance", the "second youth". The first renaissance was only the beginning of old age: the apparent rebirth was in essence the beginning of degeneration; the second, modern renaissance is already the last flash of life before real dying. The unbridled, unfettered speculation that began in Germany immediately after the completely successful military robbery, of course, does not give Nietzsche any right to speak of the limitations imposed by tradition and morality on the freedom of people, i.e., of the restrictions conditioned by the historical past. And what right does Nietzsche have to speak against the Hegelian worship of rationality and especially of the power of existence, when he himself recognizes involuntary unconscious returns, and not a conscious return, through the labor of all and the general will that has become the power that rules rationally over irrational nature?

In Chapter 8 of the work "Beyond Good and Evil" ("Peoples and Fatherland"), the characteristics of the peoples of Europe can be called completely "timely thoughts", because in them a Franco-Russian alliance is already foreseen. Nietzsche extols France over Germany, and speaks of Russia as a state that has a past and a future. He cannot forgive England for having served as the cause of the general lowering of the intellectual level of Europe: and now such “ordinary Englishmen (he says), as, for example, Darwin, John Stuart Mill and Herbert Spencer, are beginning to gain the upper hand […] the European vulgarity and plebeianism of modern times is the work of England. […] It cannot even be said of the German that he “is”, but he “will be”, he “develops”. Therefore, “development” is a purely German basis for all sorts of philosophical formulas.” If this is so (and we do not doubt it), then we must only add to these words of Nietzsche that he himself and modern Germany, which worships him, represent the complete opposite of the basis of the German so-called "enlightenment," a complete renunciation of it, a return to the French view of history in the spirit of the enlightenment of the eighteenth century. Arbitrariness is here elevated to a principle and put in place of evolution: "nascuntur" is again replaced by "fiunt," but not by a collective "fiunt," but by the work of individual, few geniuses: religions here, for example, are not born, but created, and not by priests, but by some single genius; in the same way, language is not born among the people and by the people, but is taught by a genius. Not only that! Arbitrariness, which explains the whole past in Nietzsche, is elevated by him to the fundamental law of the present, and at the same time the whole future must become the work of the same arbitrariness. Weak in denial, Nietzsche is even weaker in affirmation, and in both he expresses personal, unfounded arbitrariness. He recognizes history as a fact, that is, as it is, but sees in it only a constraint conditioned by the historical past, and calls this constraint morality. He recognizes also history as a project, that is, as it should be, as a project in which morality is a negation. There is so much of the learned, “too” learned, in a word, philistine, in Nietzsche that he does not dare to say outright that history as a fact is mutual extermination, that is, both constraint and repression, but as a project it is universal resurrection, that is, unification for resurrection. He, as a scholar, as a philistine, despises the masses, the crowds, and bows down before violence, despising himself as a scholar. He does not see that history as a fact, as a struggle, produces very few not very great people and very many very small people, these, in his expression, “erased copies of great people, and, what’s more, printed on bad paper and on worthless plates,” as a counterweight to the great and (at the same time) as their instrument; in other words, this is that numerous and despicable trifle, the characterization of which he ends with the quite sincere exclamation: "may the devil and statistics take them" (which does not recognize personalities, but deals only with quantitative units)! Unification in the matter of universal resurrection is the denial of subordination, i.e., the reduction of personality to the role of a tool, and also the denial of opposition; here there is no longer any place for either subordination or opposition, but only for cooperation. In the matter of resurrection, native and unique to everyone, no one and nothing can be a copy, an imitation, and the record, which has become worn out and unusable due to the struggle, will be restored completely, in the form in which it could have been if there were no all sorts of restrictions in relation to it.

In "Schopenhauer as Educator", Nietzsche evokes the old, obsolete, vulgarized ideals of the philosopher-contemplator, who can only be a philistine, the artist, who creates only dead, deceptive semblances, and the saint, who creates nothing, thirsting only for destruction, nirvana. Then from this vulgarity Nietzsche passes to another, even more vulgar, to the worship of knowledge without a common cause, extols prudence, modesty, bourgeois, philistine history, in the Kantian sense. The goal of art is not the work of artistic geniuses, but the knowledge of truth, i.e. the world is only a representation, not a project; it is a ghost, not a force.

It would seem that Zarathustra, who replaced Socrates and Kant in the third period for Nietzsche, should preach not countless "returns", unconscious, passive, but a single, conscious, active, real return. But superstition has such power over scientists that even Nietzsche remained a philistine and replaced business with the art of empty talk: poets for him are “astronomers of the ideal, prophets who reveal to us the brightly crimson constellations and milky ways of beauty.” Positivism should not be renounced or limited; there would be no immodesty in this unlimitedness if Nietzsche replaced the will striving for power with the labor of governance and transferred this regulation from the earth, as a heavenly body, to the heavenly worlds.