“The History of Pietism in the Reformed Church”, 1880 and the trace. G. and The History of Pietism in the Lutheran Church, 1884-1886. reveal the “complete opposite between mysticism and luteranism. Mysticism claims renunciation of the world, supplying the value of human moral behavior dependent on the ecstatic compound with God; Lutheranism, on the contrary, affirms the domination of man over the world, at the same time asserting the high value of moral behavior in himself, outside the attitude to religion. ” Of course, the true religion does not make morality dependence on the ecstatic union with God, but does not separate it from religion, supplying people with a model of unification of the triune god, not a mystical unification, but the actual control of the world, not turning God into the instrument of dominance over nature, but turning ourselves into a multi -united tool of God. Richelovo is a three -volume refutation of mysticism in importance can be put along with a three -volume presentation of his own teaching ...
<Gap in the manuscript>

... It is difficult to find anything more uncertain than Richl’s teachings about justification and salvation ... People quarreled, cooled to God, lost hope of Him; But in this, Richl believes, there was no serious insult to God; There was only a small insult, and God did not condemn, did not curse people, and there is no terrible consequences that seemed to have entailed sin after him. (What are the consequences of sin? According to the biblical legend, the consequence of sin was death - therefore, there is no death?! Does Richl think so?) Sin, in his opinion, is rather a bad habit than a hereditary vice; Richl does not consider the consciousness of their godly allegedness a curse. << 1 >> Obviously, for Richl himself, such a state would not be especially unpleasant. After all, there are such people! They, like Rich, do not see a serious insult, do not see a curse in alienation of themselves from God. But if this is so, then why, in this case, interpret about the kingdom of God on earth, about the Church as a means of uniting people with each other and with God, how, however, Richl does it?

1 But what then does Richl mean under the curse? What could be worse than alienation?