The happiness that Kant could give to man was bought at a very high price:

Forget about perfection, which is inaccessible to you (= God is only an ideal), and you will not be bothered by your imperfection!

Do not think about death: you will not fall into the paralogism of immortality!

Occupy yourself only with the visible and do not think about the future!

Whether the world is finite and eternal or not - you cannot decide this and you do not care about it!

Such are the decisions of theoretical reason.

However, the entire denial of the critique of pure reason is based on the assumption that for man discord is inevitable, knowledge only for oneself and the impossibility of uniting in a common cause. But this assumption is a prejudice, not at all recognized as such by the great philosopher. What Kant considered inaccessible to knowledge is the subject of the cause, but the cause accessible to people only in their totality, and not separately and discordantly.

The "Critique of Practical Reason" is also based on an ill-considered recognition of the inevitability of discord. The vice of discord is the foundation of Kant's moral system. This philosopher belonged to the era of "enlightened absolutism"; he transferred the principle of this absolutism to the moral world. He seems to force even God to say: "Everything for people and nothing through people!" The principle of discord and idleness is consistently carried out in all three "Critiques". "The Philosophy of Art", called by Kant "Critique of Judgment", does not speak about how one should create, but only about how one should judge objects of art and works of nature. This is a philosophy for reviewers, and not for artists and poets, not even for artists taken individually, not to mention their state when they can be viewed as creators of one and the same work through their combined, common labor, despite the discord and even hostility that now reigns among them. Likewise, nature (in Kant) is not considered as an object of action, of action, of turning blind force into controllable force, but only as an object of contemplation and judgment, and only from the aesthetic, and not from the moral side, from the point of view of which nature is a destructive, deadly force. (Meanwhile, it is precisely from this latter—moral—point of view that the question of nature is essentially important for all people, absolutely both learned and unlearned, whereas) the aesthetic, separated from the moral, the aesthetic, transferred to the sphere of only sight and hearing, is (now) the property of one intelligent class, intellectualizing and clever…

But if Kant had assumed the possibility of unification and a common cause (which, apparently, contradicts the German character in general, and Kant in particular), then the criticism of theoretical reason would be a denial of knowledge, and not of action; in other words: the realized subjective would become projective.

The critique of practical reason would then condemn the action performed in isolation, would condemn discord, but would reveal the plan of the common cause (its project). And then the critique of practical reason could not be separated from the critique of theoretical reason, for the practical cause, converted into research (not only in principles and general foundations, but in real, concrete reality), would then become knowledge.

Religion placed within the limits of such reason, that is, religion that does not separate theory from deed, dogma from commandment, would not be a meaningless and powerless Kantian religion, but would be an all-powerful work of God, the work of the God of the fathers.

The critique of religion is called "religion within the limits of pure reason," that is, theoretical reason, incapable of knowledge outside of experience (?) and practical reason, incapable of the common cause.

The critique of pure reason may be called science within the narrow limits of artificial, ununited experience; just as the critique of practical reason may be called life, placed within the narrow limits of personal affairs and discord, not considered a vice, various kinds of pranks and childishness, and in general morality for minors.

Experience, carried out not here and there, some time and by someone, but by all, always, everywhere (on the whole earth), possesses universality and necessity, that is, it yields judgments that have such properties that, according to Kant, belong to a priori judgments. Such is Karazin's experiment, carried out properly...

Everything good, according to the teaching of theoretical reason, constitutes an ideal, and not reality; reality, however, is perceived by practical reason. But reality, in the form in which it still exists, consists of: 1) a soulless world, of a soulless and insensible force; and therefore the teaching about it is appropriate to call it not cosmology, but chaosography. Secondly, reality (in its current, improper form) consists of powerless souls, the teaching about which can be called psychology only in a projective sense, in the sense of the possibility of re-educating (re-creating) them into active souls, capable of influencing a soulless, blind force. The separation of the world from reason and feeling and of the soul from force (world) is reality, it is a fact; but at the same time it is also world evil. The unification of the world and spirit, of world force with reason and feeling is a project, but at the same time it is also a commandment of God and, finally, — a reality that is possible and must exist, and not an abstract and unattainable ideal.