In our attempt to master and reconsider the problems of Marxism, we have come across a completely unexpected objection. It would not be unexpected if it came from Marxists. But it comes from P. N. Savitsky, who defends against us what he considers to be “orthodox” Eurasianism. (Incidentally, this little word “orthodox” perhaps betrays P. N.’s psychological closeness to the dogmatists of Marxism.) This objection is that “Marxism is a monistic system. And whoever says: “Marxism is necessary” (the previous sentence cites the assertion attributed to us that “Marxism is necessary, but insufficient”) asserts that in social phenomena and in ideological compositions we find only a reflection of material-economic relations. No reality can correspond to the idea of ​​God here. "And if the existence of God is recognized as reality, then this is no longer Marxism."1 A completely correct conclusion - our "Marxism" is not Marxism. But the train of thought that clothes Marxism with some kind of sacred inviolability is remarkable. If we heard such an argument from Pokrovsky or Bukharin, we would not be surprised at all. But why would a Eurasianist, even an "orthodox" one, need to protect Marxism from any attempt on its "orthodoxy"?

Our attitude to Marx's teaching is less reverent. We do not see Marxism as a dogmatic stronghold, every stone of which must be defended to the last drop of blood or against which one must break one's forehead until it is completely crushed. For us, Marxism is a historical phenomenon, varied and fluid. Two moments in its process particularly attract our attention: its emergence in the brilliant head of its founder from Hegelianism “put on its feet” and its role in the Russian revolutionary process. We consider it necessary to distinguish between these two moments, and interest in each of them is caused by different reasons. Russian Marxism (Leninism) is important for us as the force that organized the Russian revolutionary element and is now (with what measure of success is another matter) organizing post-revolutionary construction. This Marxism is a political, volitional force much more than a world outlook. The world-contemplative element in it is completely subordinated to the goals of practical politics. Its philosophy is utilitarian: it is entirely determined by political demands, “the interests of the proletariat.” We do not consider it necessary to reverently proclaim the inviolability of the philosophy of Stalin and Bukharin. On the contrary, we assert that it is precisely from the utilitarian point of view that Bukharin’s Marxism is unsatisfactory. The interests of the workers are not ensured by the “metaphysics of the ‘Atheist’” and require a new worldview, not bound by the traditions of social democratic “orthodoxy.” But Bukharin’s Marxism is a philosophy that is not particularly coherent. It must be untied, those components must be selected from it that may be necessary in the process of current construction, and it must be seen whether they do not belong to Eurasianism rather than to orthodox Marxism. Since, in our opinion, it is Eurasianism that is becoming the ideology most useful for post-revolutionary construction, and everything that is “useful” for this construction essentially belongs to Eurasianism. We have a different approach to Marx’s own Marxism. In its final form, Marx’s Marxism is just as “utilitarian” as Leninism. The philosophical values ​​embedded in it were sacrificed to the political tasks of the current moment. A formula was created which solved the problems of the present day with greater approximation (with much greater approximation, we think, than any other contemporary formula); although with time its ever-increasing discrepancy with reality began to be revealed. In the creation of this formula, philosophy played a subordinate role. Dialectics retained an honorable, but not an effective place; it reigned, but did not rule. Marx's primary philosophical intuition was given a one-sided development. Marx's monism can be compared to the moon: it always faces us with the same side; nevertheless, it is spherical and its other hemisphere also exists. To restore the "other hemisphere" of Marxism means to overcome Marxism. The symbol (and, we repeat, only the symbol) of such overcoming for us was the philosophy of N. F. Fedorov, in which any one-sided monism, both spiritualistic and materialistic, is overcome, and it is overcome, we think, in a direction not only truly Eurasian, but also truly Christian. Marx's materialism (in the general process of German philosophy) was a historically necessary antithesis to Hegel's one-sided spiritualism. Accepted dogmatically, it is, of course, irreligious and atheistic. But no less irreligious is the rationalistic spiritualism from which it emerged. For Christian consciousness there can be no choice between materialism and idealism - both are equally bad. But since an irreligious culture is much more educative was based on irreligious or pseudo-religious idealism, historically materialism is less harmful than idealism. For Eurasians, even if not "orthodox", the open godlessness of Marxism (very weakly connected with Marx's basic historiosophical intuition) cannot become a temptation - the temptations of pseudo-religious spiritualism are very real and attractive to many. We leave the "orthodox" - Bukharin and P.N. Savitsky - to worry about the dogmatic inviolability of orthodox Marxism.

NOTES

Published from: Eurasia. 1929. No. 11. February 2.

An editorial in Eurasia (published without a signature), written in response to the reproaches leveled at left Eurasianism by P.N. Savitsky in the article “The Eurasia Newspaper Is Not a Eurasian Organ,” which was included in the collective brochure by Y.N. Alekseev, V.N. Ilyin, and P.N. Savitsky “On the Eurasia Newspaper” (Paris, 1929). See the excerpt from Savitsky’s article in the anthology below.

1 Quote from P.N. Savitsky’s article (Op. cit. P. 4).