As far as you can understand the multilayer, talkative Aphorisms of Nietzsche, our virtues are equated with nonsense with a link to the Russian proverb: "simple to stupidity." Of course, such an identification is possibly not new: the mind was identified with cunning, with kulaks, with the ability to become a billionaire! .. Thanks to this distortion of the mind and virtue itself became a pity and empty. It is only strange that Nietzsche considers his discovery that all moral philosophy (i.e., moral in spirit and direction) were boring. [Must add that] and Nietzschean philosophy (although far from moral) is no exception; Denial, overwhelming, can excite anything but boredom: replacing a ram with a tiger does not mean to elevate morality! What creates the possibility of enjoying something that causes pain and torment, enjoying the tragic one is nothing more than the rigidity of the soul or cruelty.

Having recognized the emptiness of the current good, Nietzsche did not show us the greatest good, that is, the unification of all those living for the resurrection of all those who died through the conversion of destructive power into the dictating. But he did not show the greatest evil either, for then he would have to bring the disconnection to universal beating. Then, as a pleasure, it would have already turned out something like Neron’s bullying Christians with animals. But no matter how hard this “superman” is “superman”, however, before the open sermon of such a tragic pleasure, abolishing any humanity, even he dared to rise even with all his contempt for weakness and pity! will turn into a project of universal resurrection. It is necessary to think about the very basis of life in its current, non -part state, and then it turns out that such a life in the very essence of its own is the appropriation of a stranger, taking possession of what does not belong to us, the crowding out and oblivion of the fathers, submission or ruthless destruction of the weakest strongest, who forgot the duty of the sons to the past and the fraternal - to the present ...