Nietzsche and relics; The representative of "fun science" and the victim of death.
Is the excessive or insufficiency of history expressed in relics?
Should history be limited to the remains, debris, or does it require restoration in solid and lively?

Nietzsche's gross mistake, and his opponents, consists, firstly, in oblivion that the present is a son, and a story, that is, is a story, is a father and mother; And secondly, that a person is not a passive creature, that is, a scientist, condemned to inaction, doomed only to thinking, but an active creature, a figure.

If sons have a love for fathers, can pale memories of their father be sufficient for them? And if these memories are in reality, to our shame, pale, fragmentary, incomplete, then what excessive history can be about? It is clear that Nietzsche knows only school, professorship! The true story is not content with “pale” memories: she wants to see, touch, waits for a review, response ...

But even leaving aside it is a radical objection, one cannot but be surprised at the vulgarity of the argumentation of Nietzsche. “Take it,” he says, “for the most extreme example of a person who would be completely deprived of strength to forget.” It will be easy to answer: take a person who would be deprived of the ability to remember. Thus, Nietzsche concludes, "it is possible to live almost without memories." What is the logic! A person, almost devoid of memories, will be an animal, says Nietzsche. And what, we ask, will be a person who is completely devoid of memories? To an objection: what would it be if a person began to force himself to refrain from sleep? - You can answer: what would happen if he condemned himself to a constant dream? Such ridiculous disputes should be provided with “scientists”, adding only that the “superman” will, of course, be completely devoid of all memories and will sleep without a waking up.

But what Nietzsche would have said if he had heard about the breeding of all worlds through all resurrected generations, when all past generations simultaneously appear on all heavenly worlds, on Earth as a star, and on the stars like the lands? .. And this would, despite all their immense, still not the excessiveness of history, but only a real measure of history.

*1 In the manuscript, this article was originally entitled “Joasaf-Tsarevich and the grave of Yusuf (Asaph) in Kashmir”; The presentation in the first edition, apparently, was lost (V. A. K.).