Nietzsche's essential shortcoming is the fragmentary, aphoristic nature of his philosophy, the lack of integrity in it. Hence, a series of contradictions, antinomies, to such an extent that his entire philosophy becomes a question. Calling for going beyond the boundaries of good and evil, i.e. recognizing that in the former not everything is good, and in the latter not everything is evil, he himself, however, does not go beyond the boundaries of aristocracy and democracy, in which good and evil are currently manifested; he himself does not become above slavery and domination. Speaking about scientists, i.e. about what is on this side of good and evil, recognizing scientists as superstitious, he rightly condemns them, saying: "with what naivety [...] is permeated, for example, the scientist's faith in his superiority, [...] the confidence, alien to doubt, with which he instinctively considers an uncultured person to be an insignificant, inferior type, which he has long outgrown in all respects - he, an insignificant dwarf, a man of the rabble" (Aphorism 58. "Beyond Good and Evil"). Having correctly defined the mortal sin of scientists, Nietzsche, unfortunately, does not indicate the way out of this state. Nietzsche rightly says (Aphorism 47) that a symptom of mental neurosis is unbridled lust, turning into convulsive repentance, renunciation of the world or asceticism; that is, this means that one mortification of the flesh (voluptuousness) passes into another - into asceticism, if it did not have the opportunity to accidentally pass into a third - into the mortification of others. So, if mysticism on this side of good and evil is both good and evil mortification of the flesh, considering that asceticism is not a complete virtue, just as the sometimes inevitable cruelty can be not only evil, then what will mysticism be beyond good and evil?.. The birth of sons will be replaced by the re-creation of fathers, and this will be the transition beyond good and evil, the replacement of the mortification of others and oneself by the return of life and immortality, i.e. the secret of mysticism is revealed in the general resurrection, as in the common labor of all. Mysticism, as a passion, says Nietzsche in aphorism 50, masks only the sexual maturity of a girl or a boy, that is, the mysterious process of internal secretion of that which, in unconsciousness, can produce a likeness to itself, to its parents and ancestors, and when this process is turned into a conscious action, it becomes resurrection. Sometimes mysticism masks the hysteria of old maids. This means that birth is accompanied by illness, and non-birth by hysteria, i.e. by illness. Thus, there are two illnesses (birth and non-birth or virginity) and three mortifications of the flesh, and beyond good and evil these two illnesses and three mortifications of the flesh are transformed: birth into the work of resurrection, and mortification of the flesh into the return of life. Chapter 5 of Nietzsche's book Beyond Good and Evil is called "The Physiology of Morality." This title points to the denial of the soul and the reduction of man to the level of an animal, for Nietzsche obviously does not presuppose a psychocracy, i.e. a society based on spiritual closeness, revealed by mutual knowledge, judgment of internal properties by external and external expressions, i.e. soul-seeing, which, without any mysticism, opens up the possibility for sons to live in fathers and for fathers to live in sons. In the physiology of morality, in the first half of the chapter, Nietzsche speaks of morality in general, and decisively does not even admit the possibility of a transition from coercion, from fear to voluntariness (aphorism 188). Then he speaks of the morality of people taken individually, and sets a predatory animal as their ideal (aphorism 197). In the second half of the same 5th chapter, it speaks of the “breed” of people taken in their totality, i.e. “herd spirit”... The happiness of this herd consists, according to Nietzsche, “in unbroken peace, satiety, and final unity; this is its “Sabbath of Sabbaths” (aphorism 200). There is no other goal for this herd. The lamb, or rather the sheep, is exalted in the modern general opinion: “The teaching on morality in Europe at the present time is nothing other than the morality of the herd animal” (aphorism 202), and beyond good and evil, it is not the lamb that is set as a model, but the predator as a superman.

Of course, for Nietzsche the teaching of the Trinity as a commandment for people taken not individually but in totality is completely incomprehensible, a commandment that equally rejects both brutal predators and slavishly submissive cattle and does not allow either devourers, nor devoured. But we just don’t understand why the “anarchist dogs,” who seem to consider nothing impermissible for themselves and who are certainly not guilty of either gentleness or compassion, were nevertheless not honored by Nietzsche with the elevation to the rank of superman, but are only contrasted with the “mad” socialists who dream of universal brotherhood? Of course, one cannot expect an understanding of brotherhood from a German who has renounced his class and fatherland and wanted to be a Polish nobleman, although every child understands it. But precisely because the “mad socialists” do not know the brotherhood of sons called to a great cause, they “contribute to the involuntary darkening and effeminacy which (by denying both military service and the combination with it of universal compulsory education) I. — N. F.) weigh like a curse on Europe and, perhaps, threaten it with a new Buddhism."

*1 In order to avoid misunderstandings regarding such brief and casual remarks by Nikolai Fyodorovich on such an important topic as mysticism, we allow ourselves to draw the reader's attention to the fact that this article is not about mysticism in general, in all its forms, but only about what is called here "hypnosis" (a painful excess) of mysticism and mysticism turning into "passion". It would be a gross mistake to assume that our thinker reduced all mysticism, any mysticism whatsoever, to those three painful variants of the mystical mood that are mentioned here and which, of course, he, and not he alone, could not help but condemn. Even in this article N. F. says that mysticism is capable of “good” manifestations, and immediately points to that higher mysticism in which he sees “the transition beyond the boundaries of good and evil.” We also draw attention to the recognition of the “secret of mysticism,” which remains a secret until the time of its revelation in the general resurrection. It would be equally unfounded to conclude from the thoughts of this article about Nikolai Fyodorovich’s unconditional condemnation of asceticism. Here, only that asceticism is rejected which, as a painful consequence, follows from the above-explained unhealthy extreme of mysticism. In general, for Nikolai Fyodorovich, asceticism is a “virtue” (as we see from this article), although “incomplete.” More important, however, than all the written evidence on this matter is the life behavior of Nikolai Fyodorovich himself: all who knew him can unanimously confirm that he himself led in all respects such an ascetic way of life that is found only among rare true ascetics. But in this very severe implementation of his ascetic rules, he did not see a self-sufficient moral goal, and consequently, moral merit in essence; asceticism for him was not a goal, but a means of moral self-education, self-restraint and adjustment of the forces of the human organism for the highest goal of life. (V.A.K.)