1st passage

All the “criticism” of Kant, which reflected the prejudices of one of the city classes, convicted of thinking without action, not experiencing a oppression of nature that removes everything reminiscent of death, can be expressed as follows.

She takes nature in all her soulless power and puts rational creatures against her in their alienness, separateness and inactivity. Thanks to this, it leaves them limited in space, attaching them to the earth and covering them the sky, and limited in time, that is, mortals. Both interferes with the simultaneous and widespread action of all generations on blind power.

Kant, without delving into the reasons that make people powerless, declared them unconditionally incapable of perceiving the world in his whole, incapable, therefore, to be the mind that ruling this power. Without making people, or sons and daughters in their totality or brotherhood, the conscious tools of the will of the god of the fathers, “criticism” deprives the nature of reason and feelings; Blind, spontaneously living power does not turn into a reasonable will, that is, leaves nature in a state of chaos, not space; Separating psychology from cosmology, it deprives the human souls of the power and God himself from the real, life -life, active creature into distraction, into thought, into an idea only of perfection, into ideal.
2nd passage
... City “criticism”, the philistine, with contempt with the contempt of the village, who does not experience in the person of his representatives of the oppression of nature, living a civilian, and not by a generic life, takes nature in all its soulless power and puts rational creatures against it in their unrelated alien, separately or raznis because of urban trifles and squabbles, bearing a thunderous name of political and social issues, and in Their inactivity and separation both in knowledge and in the case against the yoke of blind nature. The subordination of this ISU of the fatal acting power is the cause of the powerlessness of people, their limitation in space by attaching to the earth, about the liberation from which the city man does not dare to dream about the discovery of ways to heavenly worlds. The same reason, the same slavery creates limitation in time thanks to our mortality, about the transition from which the city dweller as well as about the transition from earth to heaven thinks about the transition to life (immortal). Limited in space prevents the widespread action of reasonable creatures on all the worlds of the Universe, and limited time, mortality - the simultaneous action of generations of reasonable creatures throughout the universe. Kant, not entering into the reasons that make people powerless against blind power, like a truly urban thinker, declares them unconditionally incapable not only to control, but even to the perception of the world in its integrity, which, of course, is impossible without management.