To the inquiries submitted to the 10th Archaeological

Congress in Riga:

No. 127. S.A. Belokurov. "Count A.S. Uvarov ends his article on ordinary churches (Antiquities, Works of the Moscow Archaeological Society, Part I: Materials for the Archaeological Dictionary, p. 47) with the question: "Where did the custom of building ordinary churches come from in Russia?" 2. It would be desirable to know: was there anything similar, analogous to our ordinary churches in the West, and whether we borrowed them from there, or is the custom of building such churches in times of disaster our native phenomenon"; and

No. 132. S.S. Slutsky. "It would be desirable to know whether there was anything similar to our ordinary churches in the East, not only among the Orthodox Greeks, Arabs, Copts, but also among the heterodox peoples, the Armenians, the Nestorians, the Hindus, the Chinese, in Tibet, Mongolia, Japan, etc." 3

A few words about the extreme importance of this ancient custom, the custom of building ordinary churches in times of disaster, for our time, in the era of the peace conference 4, cannot, we believe, be considered as a deviation from the subject of the Archaeological Congress.

Ordinary churches, as monuments of unanimity and agreement, prove positively, just as the peace conference, which has turned almost into a commission for sanitary preparation for war, instead of pacification, proves negatively, that for the human race it is not peace that is possible, but an alliance for a sacred, common, great cause, on which life itself depends, i.e. peace is impossible without an alliance. Such a thing will make war impossible. The union of nations is possible only in the matter of turning the weapons used in war into weapons of salvation from crop failure and from the harvest of disease-causing germs (pathogenic microbes), as is said in the article of Novoye Vremya of October 14, 1898, No. 8129 - "Disarmament" 5. Such external pacification is not at all alien to Archeology, for the moral task of this great science is to, by collecting and restoring the monuments of the past of all nations, unite the present living generation, the sons-descendants, in love for the fathers-ancestors, love not dead, but life-giving. That is why we call Archaeology the greatest and holiest science, because without the knowledge of monuments and remains of the dead - not only mental knowledge - the unification and brotherhood of the living is impossible. The construction of ordinary churches, being the highest expression of help and toil, is the product of nature and the entire history of the Russian land, or the continental part of the globe; the question about them, posed by the Archaeological Congress, applies to both the near and far West, the far and near East, i.e., it becomes universal and calls for an explanation of what hindered or contributed to the existence of customs that led to the construction of ordinary churches, and what is needed to bring about these customs, i.e., for pacification to come in all its force; the construction of ordinary churches, built in one day, is an image of pacification, for the short period of time appointed for construction requires the closest internal connection, internal union for the construction of the temple as the external expression of the church. This custom, the custom of building ordinary churches, undoubtedly characteristic of Russia, does not indicate its calling to the work of pacification?!

The article on ordinary churches, and especially on the Church of the Savior, contrasts them, these usually small churches, with the huge medieval churches of the West, built for many centuries and unfinished due to discord - or lack of unanimity - and contrasts them with the huge temples of the East, which, although completed, were products of oppression or yoke. Thus, ordinary churches differ from the temples of the East in their voluntariness, and from the temples of the West in their unanimity in the work of creation, which was expressed mainly in the speed of construction.

This article, which speaks about the structure of ordinary churches, could be called "On the community in action itself", in work, or labor, and moreover in a holy matter, in the sacred rite, in the liturgy, since only in such action is the community truly a community, i.e. unity, and not disunity, internal communion without external oppression, internal communion instead of internal disunity, restrained only by external force. Only in action can conciliarity find its expression, only in action is true conciliarity, and not in debates that lead to disunity; true conciliarity transforms dogma into a commandment, and thereby confirms it; such is the dogma of the Holy Trinity as a model or commandment of unanimity and agreement - pacification in a universal matter; only in the sense of action does conciliarity constitute the true property of Orthodoxy, which now is sorrow over discord and oppression; when united in a cause, that which causes sorrow is eliminated, both discord and oppression are eliminated; only in this way will it be possible to live not for oneself alone and not for others, but with all and for all; and to live with all, that is, those who are living, is brotherhood, to live for all, that is, even for the fathers who are no longer living, is fatherland. But in order to live with all living, that is, with those who fight and oppress, or displace one another, without taking part in the fight in struggle and oppression, or in general in repression, it is necessary, while sympathizing with those being repressed, not to be at enmity with those who repress, and in order to avoid more and more struggle and to be less and less oppressive, it is necessary to renounce the desire for centers, from villages to cities, and also upward, and to participate only in salvation from the misfortunes common to all people, for which neither struggle nor oppression is required. One must live not only for oneself, but also not for others, but with everyone (brotherhood) and for everyone (fatherland), because if one lives not with everyone, but only for others, that is, for some, even for many, this means that, doing good to some, you will do evil to others; one must live with all living (brotherhood), because more is no longer possible, and less is immoral, and one must live not for the disadvantaged, which is already included in life with all living, but for those who are deprived of everything and for whom everything must be done, that is, for the dead, deprived even of life; there can be no greater deed than the return of life itself, and therefore this is the highest moral deed. It is necessary not only to refuse to participate in the struggle and repression, but also to correct all the evil that the struggle has caused, i.e. to return life to all the victims of the struggle.

On nationality in its past and supposed future and the answer to the question "What is Russia?"

Without denying the possibility of the existence both in the West and in the East of phenomena similar to the construction of our ordinary churches, especially in the most ancient period of history, just as in the West there were communities with which the custom of building ordinary (or usual) churches is not closely related, since the construction of such churches is the community itself in action, as has already been said - so, without denying the possibility of something similar both in the West and in the East, we, however, are decisively inclined to believe that this custom is a native phenomenon and, moreover, the most characteristic, containing the most essential features of our nationality; in a word, the question of ordinary churches is a question of the Russian nationality itself, of the national spirit and its manifestations in economic, state and church affairs - in the past, as well as of the expected manifestation of this spirit in the future; and the time for the manifestation of this future, we must assume, is already approaching, let us hope that the circular of August 12, 1898, on the limitation of armaments 6 lays its foundation.

For the construction of ordinary (one-day) churches, only a one-day community is needed, but of the deepest, closest union, a union that is selfless, blameless, holy... The community, the artel, the cathedral are considered by many to be the distinctive feature of the Slavic tribe; but the first, the second, as well as the third, speak only of the unification of forces and do not indicate the purpose of this unification, while in ordinary churches the very purpose of the unification of forces is indicated, and we recognize this purpose if, instead of the church, which is an image, a canopy, a symbol ** , a prototype, we put a reality corresponding to it; for the new covenant is reality—the realization of what is desired, the realization not only in thought, not in word, not in artistic image, but in deed itself, the realization of what is desired ("I look forward to the resurrection of the dead"), i.e. the fulfillment in deed—in fact—of the prayer of all the living for all the dead. Thus, ordinary churches are not only monuments of unanimity and agreement, but also harbingers of the common cause of salvation, or universal resurrection, which will sooner or later receive a world center in a conference, congress, or council.

The meaning and significance of the construction of ordinary churches is revealed, or becomes understandable, upon a comprehensive examination of this construction; It can be viewed from the religious side, as an expression of religious upsurge, and from the psychological side, showing, contrary to the assertion of Western psychologists, that the crowd, united in the holy work of building a temple, is cleansed of vices, becomes, albeit for a short time, a holy church, having one soul, becomes capable of action, which can be expressed not only in morbid phenomena, mental epidemics ... One can consider the construction of ordinary temples and as help or toloka, as collective or cooperative work; but at the same time this is not a legal-economic, but a purely moral phenomenon, and the introduction of legal-economic interests into help and toloka only distorts them. One can consider the construction of ordinary temples from the geographical side; examination from this side points to the forest belt, which brought up people capable of building, carpenters, and provided the material for the construction of ordinary temples, and also points to those climatic conditions that require the greatest combination of forces to complete the work in the shortest possible time; it also points to the steppe belt, which brought up the "destroyers of buildings", who with their destructive raids did not allow solid buildings and forced them to build in a hurry - skorodoms, skorogorods and, so to speak, skorokhrams ... In the construction of ordinary temples, both forest and field (the steppes of the nomads), the heat of summer and the cold of winter, in a word, the entire physical and mental nature of the continental depths participated of the earthly planet... Looking at it from the historical side, we will see that ordinary churches are the product of the Pskov-Novogorod land, bordering on the Germans, and then of the Moscow state. The force that produced ordinary churches manifested itself with the greatest energy in saving the Russian land from the troubles caused by the impostors; the same force manifested itself in 1812, although with less intensity. We will not, however, examine each side separately here, since they are all in the closest connection with each other; we will only point out the ordinary burials of wanderers with the common help and toloki of the greater part of Moscow, from the tsar and his family. (See "Theological Herald" - 1897, No. 2.) 7

The custom of building ordinary churches is only the highest manifestation of our help and help, the highest expression of unanimity and agreement, promising a great future, when unanimity and agreement will manifest itself not only temporarily and accidentally, not only in some isolated places, when it will find application to a great common cause, to universally obligatory knowledge, to knowledge that is not empty, but expressed in a common cause, for which, let us hope, the peace conference will become the center, as has already been said.

In the questions about ordinary churches, addressed to the West and the East, there is, or should be, the question of help and help, i.e. the question of whether there was anything similar to our help and help both in the West and in the East. Although this question has no direct relation to archeology, it is included in the historical-archaeological question, and it is desirable that congresses not specialize, but expand their tasks.

Although in pomochi and toloki 8unanimity and agreement is manifested in a degree lower than its manifestation in the construction of ordinary churches and is not applied to such a sacred matter, but in pomochi and toloki unanimity and agreement is expressed not only in rare moments, as in the construction of ordinary churches, but constantly, annually, everywhere, and moreover, both among Russians and among foreigners living in Russia *** . However, the constancy and ubiquity of pomochi and toloki, as well as the action of the moral principle in them, is still a question that can be resolved only when, firstly, pomochi and toloki are distinguished from the mass of legal customs to which they are incorrectly attributed, as will be seen from the following; secondly, when information about them will be collected from everywhere and especially from distant, remote places where they have not yet been exposed or have been little exposed to the influence of city life, from those places where the epics of the old times are still alive, as well as from the Old Believers; and thirdly, when information—thus collected by local intelligentsia—will be developed not by economists and lawyers, but by psychologists.

In the Russian land - in the land of communities, secular gatherings, artels, brotherhoods (which was reflected in the very arrangement of temple refectories, or similar huts, for commemorations, for feasts on temple holidays and for gatherings - "Theological Herald", 1897, No. 2-9) the question of pomochi and toloki, as well as of ordinary temples (the question of collective psychology), is the most essential and fundamental question, and moreover one that can give a different appearance to all philosophy, to all its parts, since this question unites theoretical and practical philosophy into one, into projective philosophy; and this will be a philosophy that is neither subjective nor objective, and there will be nothing in it that is irrelevant to the matter.

And pomochi and toloki begin with an appeal to God to pomochi and toloki. "God to pomochi" is a common greeting for us, in Russia, to anyone who works; We do not know whether the expression "God in toloka" is used, and this question can also be put among the questions to which it is desirable to receive answers. Pomoch' and toloka are unambiguous words, and in some places toloka has a broader meaning, and in others pomoch' is used in a broader sense. In the construction of ordinary churches, pomoch' and toloka are elevated to a sacred cause. An ordinary church, as a building, is a product of the church in its ideal meaning as a society with one heart and one soul. An ordinary church is a sacrifice brought by all and for all... But pomoch' and toloka in themselves are not devoid of sacred meaning: "working the world for a treat" 10 is an expression that is imprecise and not characteristic of patriarchal life, and working the world is a product of precisely patriarchal life; but the work here is not a commodity, and the treat is not payment, and nevertheless this free labor is fruitful, active labor, and the word tolochee itself means more active. The treat is an expression of gratitude, a kind of Eucharist, for the work of the tolochans and pomochans, that is, fraternal, worldly help, is completed by a fraternal meal, which resembles what was called agape 11. Pomochi and toloki are not an economic phenomenon, even if the treat is accepted for payment, for there will be no correspondence between the work and the payment for it, and the work is completely voluntary. There is nothing legal in pomochi and toloki, for this is not hiring, there is no bargaining or contract. That pomochi and toloki are phenomena of a purely moral order, and not economic or legal, this is especially proven by the help to the poor. So one day **** came to help a poor widow, not the whole world, of course, but only a few people 12. The poor widow had nothing to treat, to express her gratitude to the helpers, and when they finished their work, she said to them: "My dears, I have nothing to treat you with, do not blame me. Send you, Lord, your mercy, to your parents - the kingdom of heaven," - and fell at the feet of those helping her, who, of course, did not expect any treat from her. The widow did not limit herself to wishing God's mercy to those who worked, but also wished their parents the kingdom of heaven, i.e. this is a completely religious act. Doesn't the help that is usually done on holidays prove that for our peasants a holiday is not a rest, not a Sabbath, but work, labor, doesn't this prove that our peasants act in this case in accordance with the Gospel, and do not see holidays in idleness? 13.

According to Dahl's dictionary, help or toloka is the gathering of the population to one owner at the call for friendly work for one day. The owner treats the helpers and in this way, in one go, he harvests grain, mows the meadow, threshes. In this one-day help lies the custom of building a temple in one day... There is also a toloka for the removal of earth, for cutting cabbage, i.e. everything is done together. This collective work of all together gives strength and energy to each one separately, captivates the lazy, gives strength to the weak, in a word - it infects, but infects with health, strength, contrary to the opinion of Western psychologists, who draw their conclusions from observations of degenerating peoples ... Work by helping and toloka, besides the fact that it is friendly, contentious, is also accompanied by songs and is done with such joy and merriment that one of those describing field work by helping doubts whether it can be called a harvest. With such friendly work, work ceases to be a heavy burden and becomes a good, voluntary yoke. Without this combination, not only serfdom, but also labor for oneself does not seem easy, is not done with such joy; among people, even hard work becomes easy and becomes joyful. So, this is what friendly work means, collective work; such work is the elevation of work to art, to poetry, to a good deed, to the service of God, i.e. in this combined work art, morality and religion are united. Pomoch and toloka, although they do not have such moral perfection as ordinary temples, are ordinary in every sense, both in the meaning of an ordinary, constant phenomenon, and in the meaning of a one-day, or ordinary, performance, accomplishment of work. The corvee itself was only an abuse of pomoch - the voluntary turned into compulsory, the collection became a drive; but the treat remained with the landowners, it was done in the fall, after all the field work was finished. To what extent this custom was widespread, we do not know, and the question about this should also be included in the number of questions about pomoch and toloka. Pomochi and toloki are characteristic not only of Russians, but also of foreigners, as is evident from Yakushkin’s “Customary Law” (Bibliographic Index) 14 and from the above-cited letter of Mr. Mikhailov; so that the main factor, at least, in turning people to collective work, in accustoming them to such work, was the climate, which gives a very short period for sowing, mowing, harvesting and, in general, for all agricultural work; and therefore pomochi cannot be a subject of our pride, even if it turned out that pomochi belong to Russia alone, which has a continental climate by and large. Thus, in the matter of explaining the question of collective work in its past, present and future meaning, both those who make the Russian people the bearer of all virtues and Westerners, i.e. those who see in it, in the Russian people, the bearer of all vices, i.e. both those who love the Russian people and those who hate them, can take part in the matter of explaining the question of collective work in its past, present and future meaning. In some places pomochi and toloki have become so distorted that some will even doubt whether they were ever an expression of unanimity and agreement. However, there are still places where pomochi and toloki—this application of unanimity and agreement to economic affairs—preserve a religious character, not a legal one, but a purely moral one. In the article “The Schismatic Community on Vyatka” by Dobrotvorsky it is said: “They (the schismatics) help each other in everything, almost all their work is done with pomochi, in a circle; and there is not a drop of wine on the pomochi: “We don’t go there to drink, but rather, it means, for love,” say the schismatics, “he will help me, and I will help him” (Russkie Vedomosti, 1884, No. 24). The main features of the pomochi and toloki have been preserved precisely in those places where ancient epics are still alive, and in the past, ordinary churches were mainly built. G. I. Kulikovsky (Olonets Gubernskie Vedomosti, 1889, No. 34) sees in the pomochi arranged by peasants “for the sake of mowing meadows, harvesting, plowing, laying ready-made logs on the foundation when building a house, bringing logs for it, making a stove in a new house,” etc., the habit of “living together for a long time, work together"; "at the same time," says Kulikovsky, "to help one the whole community or even several nearby communities come to the visitor with their own tools... when transporting logs for building a house, the community members come with their horses, ropes, axes, etc.; both men and women go to the forest in a long line of 20, 30 or more horses; the forest is cut down together, loaded onto sleds together, transported, and in two, three or four stages whole mountains of logs brought by the help are erected on the village street... "All this is very reminiscent of the construction of ordinary churches, we note on our own. Then "the owner treats the helpers and begins to build; he hires workers to cut the logs, but once the logs are built, the same helpers come to him at his first invitation, dismantle the entire log house and transfer it to the foundation" ... "Laying beams, ceiling, rafters, roof, etc. "The hired labor is again producing..." To build a stove, for the so-called stove-making, people are again invited to help, clay is brought in and the stove-making begins *****. "The work goes on merrily and lively, to the beat of folk songs, and in about two hours a large peasant stove is ready." After that, dancing and refreshments begin and "the helpers sometimes leave only at midnight"... "The alternation of helpers with hired labor just described will be all the more understandable," says Kulikovsky, "if we assume that in the old days peasant houses, or buildings in general, were built by an entire community; the community would go to the forest, build the entire house; ... the owner of the house under construction, out of gratitude, would offer the workers a number of treats..." Helpers are most often arranged on holidays and after dinner. "In conclusion, it remains to be regretted," says Kulikovsky, "that a wonderful custom is falling, ceasing..."

Pomochi and toloki are applied not only to economic needs, they are also applied to state affairs, and in some epochs pomochi received an unusually wide application among us, as, for example, in the so-called Time of Troubles and especially in the stateless period, when Moscow was occupied by the Poles, and the Lavra was under siege or had barely emerged from it. In the Time of Troubles, the Russian land was saved by mutual aid and toloki, of course, also with God's help, expressed, among other things, in the activities of the Trinity-Sergius Lavra 15. It would be desirable to make a comparison of the methods of salvation among different peoples in similar situations, i.e. in stateless times. The cities then communicated with each other by letters, many of which are collected in the second volume of the acts of the Archaeographic Expedition. Such, for example, is the letter of the Vychegodtsy to the Permians, in which it is said that the Vychegodtsy want to consult with the entire Perm land, from the smallest to the greatest, in order to live and die together, without betraying each other in anything

(No. 102, as well as Nos. 91, 97, 99 and many others) 16. Do not these letters remind one of those messages by which Christian communities of the times of the apostles and apostolic men sent out letters!.. This correspondence between cities about the salvation of the land contains rich material for the study of secular affairs, and therefore all the acts related to this correspondence should be isolated from the second volume of the acts of the Archaeological Expedition (which, moreover, is now becoming a bibliographic rarity) and, having added to them acts of the same content from other sources, published in a separate book.

But it was not only in troubled times that the Russian land was saved by pomochi and toloka. Their action, i.e. pomochi and toloka, is a continuous phenomenon, although not the only one and not exclusive. In the matter of creation and defense, unification and salvation of Russia, pomochi and toloka have always taken and continue to take part, i.e. the Russian land was created, restored its unity and saved not only by obligatory and compulsory service, but also by voluntary service. Pomochi and toloka are a manifestation of voluntariness, just as compulsory service is a consequence of the insufficiency or weakness of voluntariness. Complete voluntariness is an expression of maturity, while a lack of voluntariness is a consequence of the immaturity of society. The call of princes by pre-Moscow Russia was a clear recognition of the weakness of voluntariness for defense against the steppe barbarians and for internal unification, and an expression of its sufficiency, i.e. voluntariness, only for unforced submission to the summoned authority. The lack of voluntary will for unification in the so-called appanage period necessitated Muscovite coercion; nevertheless, the first uprising, as well as the subsequent ones against the Tatars, against Mamai, etc., were the result not only of coercion, but also of the voluntary effort of princes and people and the constant help of God, especially manifested in the blessing of St. Sergius and in the feat of two great volunteers of his monastery, Peresvet and Oslyaba. In 1812, voluntary help did not have time to develop in all its power due to the rapid end of the war, nevertheless, there were many volunteers even from the intelligentsia, despite the liberties of the nobility. There were volunteers in the Serbian and Bulgarian wars, a voluntary fleet of 18-volunteer on land and at sea was created. Such a significant participation of voluntariness, or toloka, individual and collective, in the past, gives hope for the manifestation of even more greater voluntariness - in the future, if only the goal is not a free state, or a kingdom of self-will, not life for oneself or for others (egoism and altruism), but a kingdom of voluntariness, i.e. life with everyone and for everyone, or redemption from the common misfortunes for all, for salvation from which ordinary temples were erected. The hope for a complete replacement of coercion with voluntariness will be realized if a constant, uninterrupted evoking (expansion) of voluntariness is recognized as necessary, accustoming to this virtue in the form of incentives for supererogatory service, for supererogatory, or voluntary, taxes, and at the same time if everything that hinders the expansion of voluntariness is eliminated, i.e. if voluntariness is used precisely for salvation from common misfortunes, and not for the satisfaction of some private benefits, which would be an abuse, and not a good use of voluntariness. And then compulsion, as a manifestation of social immaturity, would become unnecessary, and the unanimity and consent caused by extraordinary calamities and manifested until now only in rare moments of building one-day churches, would become constant and would be directed against those very calamities that caused the building of ordinary churches, that is, against pestilence, plagues, famine and death. The state, like the church, is a society of salvation from the calamities common to all the sons of men, from hunger, pestilence, plagues and - in general - death, which we see primarily, first of all - one might say - in the death of our parents. True, ordinary churches - this manifestation of the kindest, most benevolent will - have long since become, apparently, only monuments of the past; but the spirit that created them is still alive, as the priest Rebrin, our Trans-Urals correspondent, proves by many examples, which we cite below, expressing our deep gratitude for communicating them.

The cases that are usually considered the beginning of the construction of ordinary churches, namely the construction of the church in 6504 by St. Vladimir in Vasilevo in gratitude for salvation from the Pechenegs, and the construction of the church in 6530 by Mstislav in Tmutarakan in gratitude for the victory over the Kasogs, cannot strictly be considered such a beginning, since it is unknown whether these churches were ordinary and whether they were built by the combined labor of all; with regard to these churches, the only thing that is certain is that they are votive churches 19. But it is possible that these churches were also built in the same way as the church in Vladimir-Volynsky. And about this temple, called in the legend common, it is said that Vladimir, returning from the war, ordered each soldier to take a stone, and from these stones the church was built (Volyn, Batyushkov, p. 76) ****** 20. If a church was built in Vasilevo in the same way, then it must be recognized that the construction of churches by common, collective labor is also connected with the struggle against the nomads, so that common temples would be monuments to the very beginning of the pacification of the steppe. Vasilevo itself was one of those towns or fortresses that were built by Vladimir along the rivers Ros, Stugna and generally on the border of the steppe, i.e. on guard lines, as they were called in the Moscow state. Among the churches erected in a short period of time and by joint labor, by joint efforts, although not in one day, we can include the construction under Yaroslav, after a fire, of a church in Vyshgorod *******, as well as the Bryansk Svensky Monastery 6796 (1288): “after the funeral service (prayer service) the prince himself began with his own hands, with all those who were at the temple of God, the Most Pure Mother of God, to cut down wood and, having quickly completed the temple in the name of the Most Holy Lady, her honorable and glorious Dormition, and consecrated it, he ordered the cathedral to serve the Divine Liturgy” 22. But it is possible that the origin of ordinary churches is connected with the baptism of the Russian people itself and was the first deed of the newly baptized, as indicated by the legend about the construction of an ordinary church in Ugodichi ([A.A.] Titov, Rostov district, Moscow, 1885, p. 81). This remarkable tale applies to Rostov what happened in Kyiv, it makes Vladimir summon the Rostovites to a common khreshchatik, and the Ugozhane (Ugodichi is a village opposite Rostov, on the opposite bank of Lake Nero) are the first to respond to the prince's call. It is not evident that the baptism was preceded by any bookish teaching, but it is very evident that the Ugozhane know about Christianity precisely that it requires brotherly love and harmony; this great virtue—unanimity and harmony—was manifested in the building of a church in one day. The legend dates this construction to July 15, the day of remembrance of Kirik and Iulita, in whose name the church is being built, to the day of the death (future) of the equal-to-the-apostles prince 23. The absence of preliminary instruction shows that this temple was already a school... In all likelihood, other old cities also had legends in which Vladimir was made their godfather from the font; and since "the Russian people were baptized without preliminary announcement, or enlightenment, i.e. the baptism of the people was accomplished on the same basis on which children are baptized" (Preface to the Legend of the Construction of the Common Church in Vologda. 

"Readings in the Society of Russian History and Antiquities", vol. 166) 24, then the godfather of the people from the baptismal font had to take upon himself the duty of universal compulsory education. Neither Vladimir nor his successors could yet fulfill this duty, and therefore it still remains a duty, passing from one ruler to another, especially through anointing to the kingdom.

The idea of ​​the baptism of Rus' would be completely incorrect if, speaking of the prince's call to the people, we forgot about the prince himself who made the call, about the prince by whose order, as they say, the Russian people went to the baptismal font; and this prince in himself, in fact, showed what Christianity is: having accepted baptism, Vladimir disbanded his harem, stopped executing even robbers and sought out poverty... What catechism, what argument can be stronger than this example?! The great religious upsurge that found expression in the building of the common temple could only have been caused by this argument. And can that people, for whose conviction such a great moral argument was needed, be a senseless crowd, as is commonly believed, that people who in the two princely brothers (Boris and Gleb), victims of civil strife, canonized Christian love and condemned the discord that preceded the autocracy?!

The common temples that arose (according to legend) at the very introduction of Christianity were then brought back to Rus' by great misfortunes. Although misfortunes and sorrows are not uncommon on earth in general, and in Russian land in particular, nevertheless these products of misfortunes and sorrows are not often encountered. If temples, as an external expression of religion, are the products of mortal beings, then common temples are the products of extreme mortality, when losses become more frequent and mortality ******** is felt especially vividly; It is known that most ordinary churches were built during plagues, and some of these churches were even called plague churches:

“In the year 7041… Bishop Macarius erected a wooden church—the plague church” (Novgorod Chronicles, 1879, p. 125). “In the year 6898. “And there was the plague of Afanasy and they built the church of Afanasy in one day behind the cathedral church in the stone city of Detinets, and Archbishop John consecrated it with the abbess and the priest and the crosier of Saint Sophia... and the plague ceased” (Novgorod Chronicle, 1888, p. 376, [Novgorod Chronicles, 1879], pp. 37, 246). “In the years 6925 and 6926... because of our sins there was a great plague and it was very terrible for the people... And... they built the church of Saint Anastasia in one day and chopped off the logs on the same day, and with the remaining logs they built the church of Saint Elijah... and the newly-weds also built the church of Saint Elijah in their city in one morning. “Athanasia and the priests consecrated it with a council” (Novgorod Chronicles, 1879, p. 257, [p. 41]—sheet 51 rev., sheet 52). “In the year 6932. There was a plague... and throughout all of Russia, and in Lithuania, and in Germany... Bishop Euthymius built a church in Novgorod for one day behind the altar of St. Sophia, the Holy Merciful Savior.” (Novgorod Chronicles, 1879, pp. 50-51.) 25 1420. “There was a very great plague... they began to search for where the first church of St. Vlasiy, and in that place stood the court of Artemiev... having given him silver and having torn up the court, they found the throne and... in one day they erected a church in the name of the Holy Savior" (Pskov Chronicle, 18[37], p. [53]). 1442 "In Pskov there was a very great plague; and the prince... having thought with the Pskovites, they erected a church in one day on Romanikha the Praise of the Holy Mother of God... and on that day they celebrated the liturgy" (Pskov Chronicle, 18[37], p. [74]). "In the year 6975 there was a very great plague in Veliky Novgorod... and on that day they erected a wooden church in the name of St. Simeon... and the archbishop himself consecrated it" ([4] Novgorod Chronicle, 18[48], p. [127]) 26. "In the year 7035. There was a very terrible plague in Veliky Novgorod... and they built a wooden church... in one day" (Novgorod Chronicle, 1879, p. 321).

In addition to the ordinary churches in Novgorod and Pskov, it is known about the construction of a similar church in Vologda: even the most detailed account of the construction of this church has been preserved, printed, among other things, from two copies in the "Readings of the Society of Russian History and Antiquities" of 1893, v. 166. In 1571, on August 16, the Church of the Savior-Ordinary was built in Solvychegodsk, on the occasion of the plague that began on July 8, as is evident from the letter of September 7, 1894 from the Solvychegodsk ordinary church of priest Tikhon Evgenievich Chulkov; this church is dedicated to two Spas: the lower one - to the Savior of August 1, and the upper one - to the Savior of August 16. From the book by V.V. Vereshchagin "On the Northern Dvina", p. 27, it is evident that in Tsivozero, on the old channel of the Northern Dvina, Solvychegodsk district of the Vologda province, the ordinary church in the name of Florus and Laurus, built for the sake of deliverance from the plague on cattle, has survived to this day; a tracing of this church, as well as of the Turovets church, was delivered by V.V. Vereshchagin himself… 27 In 1533, an ordinary church was built in Turovets in the Vologda province, during the arrival of the infidel Kazan people (Proceedings of the archaeological congress, vol. 3—“Information about the cities and fortified settlements located in the Vologda province” 28). There is information about the construction of ordinary churches and in Ustyug, a common chapel in a tract on the Sylva (a tributary of the Chusovaya), which is known as "Ermakovo Gorodishche"; in the Kungur Chronicle, published by the Archaeographic Commission in 1880, it is said about this: "On the 9th day of May, they completed the promise of a chapel on that Gorodishche in the name of St. Nicholas the Wonderworker"; i.e., the conquest of Siberia began with the construction of a common church; and "through Siberia," says the Kungur Chronicle, "from time immemorial, the all-seeing Christ... the builder of his house... kindly commanded the Gospel to be preached to the ends of the Universe" 29.

The greatest number of known cases of the construction of common churches relate to the north of Russia; Novgorod and Pskov, in general, Northern Russia was capable of uniting, at least for a short time, and built common churches; Therefore, although Northern Rus' suffered from invasions and suffered from executions during the gathering, it did not perish. Southern Rus', however, incapable of even a short-term unification, not knowing ordinary, in the strict sense, churches, Southern Rus' suffered complete destruction...

These churches, erected in one day, were, for the most part, monuments to the great and very terrible plagues that occurred because of our sins; these churches were also monuments of repentance for the sins that caused the epidemics. At that time, they did not care about the exact designation of these sins, because they did not attach much importance to knowledge; but even at that time, wars and strife, as well as the excesses of some and the resulting poverty of others - which influenced the intensification of epidemics - were not accepted as good deeds, but were considered sins, after which the wrath of God followed in the form of plagues. That is why ordinary temples were monuments both to one-day unanimity and agreement, and to the long-term, centuries-long strife, wars, internal and external, that preceded this short-term unanimity and agreement and caused it.

For reasons or occasions for the construction of ordinary churches, in addition to those caused by plague and famine, the construction of which was caused by those built for the sake of deliverance from famine and pestilence, it is necessary to distinguish ordinary temples of peace, or pacification, built in memory of the gathering of lands and deliverance from invasions, such as the ordinary temples built by John in Kazan, Narva, etc. To the temples of peace, or pacification, it is necessary to attribute the ordinary church built on Vagankovo ​​on the occasion of the birth of an heir to Vasily (the son of Sophia Paleologue), which postponed the troubles for three quarters of a century 30. If a temple was built on this occasion in one day, then it is necessary to assume that Vasily's grief about childlessness, or the lack of an heir, was shared by all the people, that this desire was common: just as in a long drought the people foresaw the disasters of famine, so in the absence of an heir by the tsar the people had a presentiment of terrible unrest, and then of invasions from the West and East or South, although the latter, fortunately, did not come true this time.

Moscow, as the capital of an agricultural kingdom, in pre-Petrine times took the most active part in the peasants' annual question of the harvest. The tsars themselves took part in the processions to Elijah, dry and wet, in prayers for a bucket and rain ********* . The people, together with the tsar, united in a common prayer for the good weather and the multiplication of the fruits of the earth not only in the royal city, but throughout the world... Not to mention the five main churches of Elijah in Moscow, the churches of St. Nicholas the Wonderworker (and perhaps other saints) became places of prayer for the harvest. Not only Moscow, the trading Novgorod and Pskov, and probably other cities also had churches of Elijah and Nikola, dry and wet 32. Just as militias were annually assembled to protect against the Tatar invasion, so religious processions and prayers were organized to protect fields from droughts and showers, and finally, ordinary churches were built as the highest means of salvation from hunger... Let us recall that the first Christian church in Rus' was dedicated to the prophet Elijah 33. Temples or statues of Perun among us, like the temples of the thunderer among the Greeks, were replaced by temples of the prophet-zealot of the one God, who gave his worshiper the prophet the power to bring down rain and close the sky; On Olympus itself the New Greeks had—and it seems still has—a temple of the prophet Elijah… The prophet’s wrath falls upon those who identify God with thunder and lightning—in a word, with nature, i.e., upon the pagan pantheists. He himself honors God, who gives power to a rational being over a blind, insensitive, cruel force, gives power not only to close the sky and bring down rain, but also to restore life to those killed by this force; therefore he, like the prophet Elisha, his disciple, are prophets of resurrection, who restored life, and did not replace the living with a dead idol. God is not only not a thunderstorm, He also manifests Himself not in a thunderstorm, but in a quiet breath (3 Kings, XVII, 18).

Moscow erected a temple to "Elija the Everyday" on the "Skorodom", i.e. on the spot in front of the rapids at the Moskva River, where rafts and entire houses were driven from above in disassembled form and where they were reassembled ********** . Thus, the quick temple, erected in one day, consecrated the place where quick houses were built. (See in the "Readings of the Society of History and Antiquities of Russia", 1874, No. 1. 34) Such "skorodoms" are perfect but understandable in Moscow, located on the border of forest and field, or steppe. Was the Church of Elijah the ordinary at Prechistenka in Moscow, behind the Chertol Gate, the first church dedicated to the prophet Elijah? In an agricultural country, even Nikola the miracle worker became a savior from famines: Ilyinka and Nikolskaya were the main streets even in the city, or Moscow posad (Kitai-gorod).

In St. Petersburg, the churches of the prophet Elijah could only be an accident; and of course, neither Elijah, nor Nikola, nor other saints with the name of dry and wet could be in this Western, European city. We do not know if there was ever even a common prayer in St. Petersburg, with a procession, for rain and a bucket?.. When labor joins the prayer for salvation from hunger, then the connection of power with the people will be restored not only in prayer, but also in labor.

In the Spaso-Golodovye and Spaso-Plague churches lies the beginning of unification for salvation, or the solution of the sanitary-food issue in a broad sense, as the issue of death and resurrection. Plague and famine ordinary churches, as well as churches of gathering, are precisely churches of the continental country. The internal, continental, vast, so to speak, core of the continent, the country of crop failures from droughts and from heavy rains (hail), the country where all the paths of contagion, i.e. pestilences or epidemics, converge, the country of pestilence and famine of ordinary churches cannot but give rise, finally, to the sanitary and food question in the broad sense, i.e. as a question of uniting everyone in the work of understanding the blind force of nature, bearing within itself hunger, plague and death, in the work of understanding nature, as a general subject of peasant or rural science, which must have application in the regulation of meteoric phenomena of the globe, as opposed to urban science in the form of cabinet or laboratory experiments, having application to the manufacturing industry. The sanitary and food question in the broad sense is the Christian, or peasant, religion itself, in contrast to the Mohammedan, or nomadic, religion, and to the pagan, or urban, religion. For the peasant religion, the extra-temple Easter—the festival of spring, or the return of life (annual work)—consists in returning to the dust of the ancestors (the village) for its revival by means of peasant science; and the extra-temple liturgy, or common work—the daytime work after the work of the all-night vigil—consists not only in the mysterious conversion of bread and wine into flesh and blood, but already in the obvious transformation of the dust itself into the body and blood of our fathers, the fathers of all generations, near and far, for the regulation of all the worlds of the entire universe, both near and far. Easter and the liturgy indicate annual and daily periods, indicate, therefore, that all time is given to the work, that destructive time has been replaced by a re-creating, restorative work. The Museum of Moscow, as the capital of a vast continental basin, surrounded by a long coastal strip - the ocean embankment - with such projections or peninsulas as: the Alpine, or Western European with Little Europe (the Balkan Peninsula), Asia Minor, Little Africa (Arabia), India and Indochina *********** and pre-American Kamchatka (Little America?!..), - the museum of the capital of the country of crop failures from droughts sent by the steppes of Asia, and from showers sent by humid Europe, the museum of the capital of the country of pestilences (where Chinese smallpox, Indian cholera, African plague, the bad diseases of civilized Europe and America converge) proposed after the famine of 1891 and the cholera of 1892, in the year of the anniversary of Sergius, to create an ordinary church in the likeness of the one built by St. Sergius of the Church of the Holy Trinity as a model of unanimity and harmony, and to make this church at the museum a model for church-schools, at all churches in the villages, and chapel-schools in all villages, creating them with the labor and resources of all of Russia for the five hundredth anniversary of the discovery of the relics of the Venerable Worshipper of the God of unanimity and harmony (see Preface to the Tale of the Construction of an Ordinary Church in Vologda in the Readings of the Society of Russian History and Antiquities, 1893, Vol. 166).

In these same temple-schools and chapel-schools of the Christian-peasant religion, it was proposed to introduce secular peasant science to unite everyone in the matter of studying the blind meteoric force with the crop failures and epidemics it produces, for the implementation of the Christian cause, for the implementation of what was desired (Epistle to the Hebrews, XI, I). The model for these schools, as was said above, was to be the museum of the basin itself, the vale of famine and plagues, whose tower would turn into an observatory of meteors and meteorites (falling stars, thunderstorms and polar lights), and the hill, or its foot, into a geological section. In a word, the Moscow Museum should become a general scientific—peasant scientific—model for rural schools, the network of which, these museum-schools, should embrace the entire central basin, and partly its outer sides, by the centenary of Karazin’s death (see “Science and Life”, 1894, No. 15-1635).

The Slavophiles talked a lot about Russian science, but they could not say anything definite about the properties and content of this science, and this is because, of course, imagining themselves Russians, they were in fact foreigners, and as foreigners they did not understand what an important significance bread has in the life of the people, the provision of a harvest, and they did not even think of making this the subject of science, that this is precisely the subject and content of Russian science, just as for the West the subject of science is manufacturing; in the same way, none of the Slavophiles even thought of using the method proposed by Karazin, while the most orthodox of the Slavophiles, Khomyakov, invented some kind of steam engine for a non-existent Russian manufacturing plant and sent it to an exhibition in London.

What significance lies in the closest union of the sons of men in the thought of the God of the fathers, manifested in the creation of a temple to Him in one day? Isn't this a good, God-pleasing, salvific deed, for when an ordinary, one-day temple is created, the whole dogma is contained in the thought of the temple, all morality (fatherland and brotherhood) is contained in the closest union, and in the temple itself is contained the totality of all arts, i.e. art in its highest, religious form. The temple is a likeness of the whole world, but a world in which there is no death, in which everything is resurrected, although only artistically, for for God there are no dead in reality, but all are alive, while for us they (the dead) are alive only artistically. The meaning of the temple is revealed from its very origin, and the origin of the temple is identical with the origin of man himself, with his rebellion, the first rise (after the fall), or vertical position. Having risen, man, or the son of man, did not leave the dead fathers, hidden in the earth by physical necessity, lying there, but imagined them coming out of the earth (the temple-monument) and populating heaven (the vault of the temple). We draw such an explanation of the origin of the temple from the Gospel itself (John), from the words of the Lord himself, spoken immediately after the first cleansing of the temple from the merchants and bloody sacrifices. "Destroy the temple," He says about his Body, "and in three days I will raise it up" 36. This was the first sermon of the Lamb (i.e. the child), revealing the meaning of the temple and the purpose of life ************ . We ourselves destroy the temples of bodies in each other and in ourselves, and build only artificial temples ************* . Will we participate in the re-creation of natural temples, which should be the extra-temple work and purpose of life?! Of course, universal education is needed so that all builders can clearly see what is involved in the creation of a temple to the God of all fathers by all the sons. The creation of a temple by a union of sons is a prototype of the redemptive work that lies ahead of them, the work of turning the blind force of nature, which manifests itself in the disintegration and fall of all the worlds of the universe, into one governed by the reason of all the resurrected generations, whose scattered dust now clothes the entire globe. In this saving work of all the sons of men, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, and the communion of the Holy Spirit will be manifested in all its power. In an ordinary temple built by sons to the God of the fathers, that education is embodied which does not exist at the present time.

The creation of a whole temple by a multi-unity in one day points to the goal and work of the human race - in all its scope in space and time; and this can easily be convinced if one delves into the meaning of each word included in this multi-layered definition. The temple in general is a likeness of the universe, very inferior to its original in reality, but incomparably superior to it in meaning. The meaning of the temple consists in the fact that it is a project of such a universe in which that which is dead in its present original is revived, a project of a universe in which everything revived has become the consciousness and control of everything that was blind. The temple itself is enormous, but small to the point of insignificance compared with the universe it depicts; but in this insignificance in size, a mortal, limited being has strove to depict both distance and depth, and breadth, and an immense, boundless height, in order to establish in it everything that in blind nature appeared only for a moment, so that this ephemeral existence in time would become ordinary in the speed of restoration, for the shorter the period of restoration, the more meaningful and broader it is in scope, embracing the whole of the past. The immensity, and power, and

life the son of man was inventive in depicting in the temple in sculpture, bas-relief, high relief, painting, iconography, resorted to sound, to word, to writing and, finally, in himself, in the living, he depicted the dead; and in this last, the collective prayer, expressed in all the preceding, turned into a temple service.

In our land, the land of skorodoms, skorogorods, ordinary temples were no exception - they were skorokhrams, although there was no such name. The construction of skorokhrams was a completely natural phenomenon in a country rich in forests, in a forested country, subject to almost annual attacks and devastations (burnings) from the inhabitants of the steppes, nomads; and ordinary temples are a necessary and most characteristic product of all the natural and historical conditions of the country, under the protection of which the West, on the contrary, built long-standing houses, centuries-old temples and thousand-year-old city. Our ordinary churches, very small, low, wooden, rustic or rural, acquire their full significance only when compared with the centuries-old, gigantic, solid stone city churches of the West, which were the creation not of the people, but of city guilds. The work of building Gothic cathedrals, stretched out over several centuries, did not require either the greatest or the closest union of forces, nor did it require the high enthusiasm that was necessary for the construction of our humble churches. The centuries-old work of a few and without high enthusiasm created a colossal, very high temple, but with small bells, which indicates the weakness, the insignificance of the collective, unifying force of these churches, due to their voicelessness or the weakness of their voice **************** , with the at the same time extraordinary strength of the aspiration of a few, not chained by need to the earth, upward, and together and separately; the small number of bells indicates silent or whispered prayer, prayer of each to himself alone, indicates the alienation from the earth of the city people, not connected to the earth. This striving upward, to which Gothic churches are disposed, is the result of only a deception of the senses, thanks to which the stone seems to have lost its weight, as if spiritualized, and leads only to an imaginary rise, the result of which is the greatest fall, disunity, the greatest discord. Discord remained in the West when the striving upward ceased and was replaced by the striving downward; then the construction of churches was replaced by the construction of factories. Together with base, industrial and commercial aspirations, the striving into the depths also developed, i.e. religion was replaced by philosophy, but discord not only did not decrease, but increased and increased. Our ordinary churches, of course, could not produce such an illusion... The churches of the West were not even centuries old, but infinitely or indefinitely centuries old, i.e. they remained unfinished due to a lack of unanimity and agreement, or due to a renunciation of the striving upward as a result of the transition from the lofty to the base, from the rise to the fall, from the medieval to the new, from romanticism to positivism. Despair and unbelief stopped the construction of churches in the West. But it was not only the time spent on construction, nor their smallness that distinguished our churches from Western ones; our small churches were at the same time temples of singing and ringing, the voices of which rose higher than the peaks of Gothic churches, while the voices of the latter (i.e. the ringing) did not at all correspond to their height; Gothic churches are bell towers, not enlivened by ringing, mute or half-mute belfries. The last breath of the dying fathers, flying upwards to the sky, showed the way to the builders of Gothic temples; temples, spreading along the earth and deepening into the earth, preserved the ashes of the fathers; ordinary temples did not move away, did not fly away from the ashes of the fathers, and with singing and ringing did not separate themselves from their souls ... *************** The colossal temples of the East were not indefinitely centuries old, they were not centuries old either, but their construction expressed not only voluntariness, but also external power; these were temples of the God of warriors, Jehovah and Allah, or Buddha, the god of hermits, these were temples of Vishnu or Trimurti, i.e. the trinity of birth, destruction and only temporary rebirth. Already in the first news of the construction of a Christian church—not in the Russian, but in the Greek church—we have evidence that this construction had one of the essential properties of our ordinary churches, namely, the participation of all in this construction, although not by personal [only] labor, as is required for perfection, but also by money. In the word of St. Gregory of Nyssa on the life of Gregory of Neocaesarea it is said that, having arrived in Neocaesarea, he “immediately began to build the temple, because everyone contributed money and labor to this enterprise” 39. But at the same time, the most essential property of our ordinary churches, by which they received their name, was missing—they were not one-day. Our small, ordinary churches were the product of high enthusiasm and the closest union, they were the product of the fatherland and brotherhood, they were not an end, but a means, and little care was even taken about their preservation; It was precisely the one-day duration, or the shortest period of time during the construction of the temple, that produced the greatest agreement of the greatest number in one common sacred work, i.e. it reproduced, although for a short time, that “multitude” which had one heart and one soul (Acts, IV, 32) — it was precisely the one-day duration of the construction that led to the fact that, although only for one day, the will of God was fulfilled on earth as in heaven; and at the same time the coming of the kingdom of God was felt, the name of God was glorified, and together, i.e. in the harmonious action and unanimity of all, the likeness to the Triune God was realized. Moreover, our ordinary temples, cleansed of money in the very creation, i.e. built by voluntary labor, and therefore most closely approaching the temple cleansed by Christ from traders, in the one-day nature of their creation completely coincide with the time of Christ’s re-creation of the temple of his body, which can also be called ordinary, just as our ordinary temples can be called three-day for those of these temples which were begun on Friday evening were finished by midnight on Saturday on Sunday. To be, even if only for a short time, for only one day, a likeness of the Triune, was a great omen for the builders of ordinary churches. If neither in the West nor in the East was there anything similar to our ordinary churches, then why should not one and the other give themselves the opportunity to experience, even for a moment, the sanctity of unity, and having tasted it, to think firmly about the perpetuation of unity and the elimination of discord. The construction of ordinary temples, that is, construction for a period as short, as short as possible, can be a model for the united action of nations and the entire human race. The shorter the period, the more strength is required to accomplish the work, or the more strength is gathered, the sooner the work will be accomplished. Despite the differences between all these temples, i.e., between their builders, there is also a profound unity among them, the unity of the sons of dead fathers. This attempt to determine the similarities and differences between our sacred buildings and buildings or edifices of the same nature in the East and West was intended only to show what a profound significance and vast scope, equal to the entire history of the world, the question of ordinary temples has. Our ordinary temples were, as has been said above, not the goal, but only a means of unification; little care was even taken about their preservation, since in the construction of ordinary temples the unification itself was significant as an expression of faith, hope, and love. The construction of temples, like suspenders and toloki, only fostered unification—a unification for which the object has not yet been found, or, more accurately, this object has not yet been recognized, although it is given, indicated by the temple itself and the services performed in it. All our grief, all our disasters, troubles and failures are in the absence of an object for common action, for a collective force, in the absence or loss of meaning and purpose.

Only in the native, in northern Russia, in the forest wilderness, a one-day or the shortest time for building an entire temple and performing a full service, as an expression of the whole thought about the work of salvation, is recognized as the most pleasing to God; and this, of course, testifies to the integrity of the national character of native Russia. In the construction of ordinary temples it is expressed that for the Christian God, the Triune, there is nothing more pleasing than a joint, multi-unit work from the whole soul, from the whole heart, with all thought (knowledge) performed. In speed (in one-day), in the dedication of all one's strength to the accomplishment of the work, zeal is expressed, i.e. the participation of the heart, soul, love, mind and knowledge in the common work. To live together is both good and beautiful, ethical and aesthetic; and labor together with the work of God is even higher, even more majestic, even more beautiful. This will be the supreme good (bonum supremum), when labor becomes the work of all living without any exceptions, the work of saving all the dead and also without any exceptions.

During the construction of ordinary churches, all thoughts and actions converged on this one sacred matter, and not only everything vicious, but also everything worldly could no longer have a place, the life of all and the whole life of each was permeated on this, at least, day by one common intention, one goal - the domestic was transformed, so to speak, into the temple, separate kinship into a common brotherhood (p. 13 of the "Tales of the Construction of an Ordinary Church in Vologda". "Readings in the Society of Russian History and Antiquities", 1893, v. 166 - "For then there was no theft... they thought of nothing worldly", etc. 40).

In Western Rus', as is evident from Malyshevsky's work "On Roadside Crosses" (Works of the Kiev Spiritual Academy, 1865, No. 11, pp. 323-428), and in the Slavic West, as is evident from M. Speransky's work "On Roadside Crosses in Bohemia and Moravia and on Byzantine Influence in the West" (Reprint from "Archive News and Notes", No. 12, 1895), in those cases when ordinary churches were built in Northern Russia, they limited themselves to erecting roadside crosses and not even chapels, although designated only for some services; as for entire churches for a full service, as is evident, they did not even think about. This, of course, testifies to the lack of integrity of the national character. Thus, when among us unanimity and consent built small temples, containing the fullness of Christian thought and deed, and called these temples primarily Spas, i.e., everyday Spas temples, at that time the West, in the person of the popes, conceived the idea of ​​building one huge temple through the impious sale of indulgences, through bargaining with the grace of redemption or salvation, and thereby aroused protest—a protest against any external expression, against the deed itself, as unnecessary for salvation, and even, in the end, against the word, as is especially the case in the Far West. (And indeed, if man is not created to say and do anything worthy of the Deity, then all that remains is to remain silent.) By such denial, the protesters deprived themselves of the joy of participation in the common work of salvation and even—in general—the joy of fellowship, of life together, deprived themselves of the reality of salvation, remaining in discord and with an imaginary personal salvation. Thus, the temple dedicated to St. Peter, became in reality a monument, on the one hand, to papal oppression, a monument to the appropriation, or rather the theft, of saving and, of course, imaginary saving power and its terrible abuse, and on the other hand, it became a monument to Protestant salvation separately, alone, of only internal salvation, i.e. the illusion of salvation - in a word, the temple of St. Peter became a monument to protested Catholicism. And this makes it clear what an important significance our naming of churches built by joint efforts as Saviors has; with these churches the people themselves gave an answer to both Catholicism and Protestantism about how they understand salvation, gave an answer by the very deed, by which they clearly expressed that salvation is possible only by common action, mutual assistance with the help of God. Let us recall that Moscow erected its first temple, still in the pine forest, in the name of the Savior 41. And what a pity that no legend has been preserved, like the Vologda one, about the creation of this temple in the name of the Lord God and our Savior Jesus Christ, and we do not know for what deliverance, from a plague, from much rain or lack of rain, or from some other disaster, this temple was cut down, we do not even know whether it was erected in one day; but that it was built by joint efforts, with God's help, by mutual assistance, this can hardly be doubted, given the universality of help and toil in Rus', and especially at that time, in an as yet untouched, virgin land. It is especially a pity now that there is no such information, now that Moscow has already celebrated seven hundred and fifty years of its existence, and it is time for it to know about its beginnings and especially about the beginnings of its temples. Having begun the construction of churches with the construction of the Transfiguration of the Savior, Moscow in our time has already added the name of the Savior, i.e. the Savior - in ancient times, to the Church of the Nativity of the Lord (the Church of Christ the Savior), thus testifying that the name of the Savior should be added to all the Lord's holidays, and especially to the Resurrection, in which lies the fullness of salvation. The Kremlin became the temple of the feast of the Resurrection, Easter, and will become, we hope, the herald of the Savior-Resurrection, i.e. salvation not only from hunger and pestilence, but also from death in general, the herald of the salvation of all the dead (“International Gratitude”, p. 263, reprint from the “Russian Archive”, 1896,

No. 2-42), for, as was said above, in the Savior-Hunger and Savior-Pestilence temples lies the entire sanitary-food issue, lies the beginning of unification for salvation or the solution of the sanitary-food issue in a broad sense, as the issue of death and resurrection.

The time of the flourishing of ordinary churches, coinciding with the time of the appearance and strengthening of Protestantism in Germany, belongs to the reign of the three senior gatherers of the Russian land, and especially to the time of the last of them, Ivan IV and the all-Russian Metropolitan Macarius; and meanwhile, while Germany solemnly celebrated the four hundredth anniversary of its disunifier Luther, Russia forgot about its spiritual gatherer, Metropolitan Macarius, whose four hundredth anniversary almost coincided with the four hundredth anniversary of Luther. Secular history has always treated Metropolitan Macarius extremely unfairly, attributing to John himself what undoubtedly belonged to Macarius; even Sylvester obscures Macarius, in whose footsteps St. Philip, the Metropolitan, wanted to follow, as he himself expressed it. Ivan IV, when he was not yet formidable due to the beneficial influence of the All-Russian Saint Macarius, participated in, or rather was present at the creation of a one-day church on old Vagankovo ​​(Nikonovskaya Letop<is>, 1789 edition, Vol. VI, 1790, p. 246). Then, in the extreme East of what was then Russia, in Kazan, and in the extreme West, in Narva, and perhaps in every city captured by Ivan IV, an ordinary church was built. The time of the Stoglav, the time of Macarius, was the golden age of ordinary or common churches. The unanimity and agreement fostered by the construction of regular churches, the pomochi and toloki during the time of the gathering, saved the Russian land in the era of disintegration, in the Time of Troubles, and greatly helped in the restoration of unity under two new gatherers, Mikhail and Alexei. With the regrettable separation of the lovers of the country (Old Believers) from the church, the construction of regular churches apparently ceased; but has this ancient custom not been preserved among the Old Believers themselves, who call their societies by the holy name of concord; it would be desirable to hear from these lovers and guardians of antiquity themselves, whether regular churches or chapels were built among them—among the priests on Kerzhenets, on Irgiz, on Vyatka, among the priestless, prayer houses—on Pomorie, on Murmansk…

Why regular churches have died out in our Orthodox Russia, can be concluded from the message of the priest. s. Mikshinsky Irbitsky district father N. Rebrin. In a letter dated November 11, 1895, Father Rebrin recounts: “in 1893 in one village of my parish it was necessary to build a stone chapel; the peasants wanted to build it as soon as possible, and they asked not to outsource the work—we would have laid it down in one day,” they said; and I believe that they would have laid it down in one day—more than half of the village’s brickmakers themselves they make bricks, they burn them themselves, they lay them themselves; but according to the law (?!) they had to tender the work; if the business had been handled more simply, the chapel would have been finished in a day... In another village they had to build a wooden chapel; as soon as the plan came out, the peasants chopped down the chapel from top to bottom in one day, all that was left was to finish it inside and out; and in the whole village there were only twelve householders…" However, the Oryol Archival Commission cites an incomparably more striking fact, testifying to the obstacles to the construction of ordinary churches in our time. “In 1794, on the night of July 1-2, a chapel appeared on Kromskoy Square in Oryol, erected by no one knows who; it was made of planks, taken into pillars, and erected near a tavern. In the chapel, a small cast eight-pointed cross with an image of the crucifixion of Christ was hung on a hemp rope; two pieces of paper were glued to the cross, one of which stated that the cross was not consecrated and needed to be consecrated and a prayer service held in the chapel, for which twenty kopecks were required; and on the second piece of paper it was written that this chapel was erected for two holidays. On this occasion, almost the entire city came into motion: many thought that the chapel not made by hands, and wanted to hold a prayer service. Soon, however, the police managed to discover the culprit of the erection of this chapel in the person of Makar Zhonilov, a peasant of the landowner Pokhvisnev, who confessed that he erected the chapel at that end so that it would always stand on Kromskoy Square and the money collected from willing donors would be used for charitable deeds. The chapel was dismantled, and Zhonilov was flogged on the spot where he had decided to build the chapel, so that others would not be tempted to build such chapels and give ignorant people a reason for superstitious talk” 44. It is impossible not to notice that this was at about the same time when Catherine wrote to the Moscow governor-general about one of the holy fools who wore chains - she ordered that this holy fool be summoned, the chains be removed from him and that this was not at all necessary for salvation... Although ordinary churches, these manifestations of the kindest, most benevolent will, have long since become, apparently, only monuments of the past, “extinct in Russia,” as was said above, but the spirit that created them is still alive, as is proven by many examples by priest Rebrin, our Trans-Urals correspondent; from his letter we have already given a story testifying to the reasons why ordinary churches were extinct in Rus'; we also give here the examples he told us as proof that the spirit that created ordinary churches is still alive.

But before giving these stories, we consider it our duty to express our deepest gratitude both for these reports and for the encouragement of others not to leave our request for information about ordinary churches and about St. Sergius unanswered. Although we have not received any information on the issue that interests us from either the Kamyshlov, Shadrinsk, or Solikamsk districts in Perm province, or from the Yalutorovsk and Ishim districts of Tobolsk province, this not only does not diminish, but even increases our gratitude to Father Rebrin, the only one in all of Siberia who responded to our above-mentioned request.

In a letter dated November 11, 1895, from the priest of the village of Mikshinsky, Irbit district, Father Rebrin, we have a description of the construction of a stone church in such a short time as one day for wooden churches, i.e. it is apparently impossible to build a stone church in less time: the church was founded on July 15, and was finished and the bells were hung at the end of September. From the story about the last days of construction of the church, it is evident with what extraordinary speed the work proceeded: “when the bell tower was being laid, there were not enough bricks - they were made, but not fired; then some quickly fire the bricks, others take them out of the ovens with iron shovels and put them on carts; many peasants burned their carts while transporting hot bricks; some carry lime, others water, some sand, some bricks, the masons did not have time to lay the bricks - there were so many free porters; "Some helped with free work every day, and some even had to be refused, there were so many assistants. The contractor hired only workers who built the walls, i.e. laid bricks along the edges of the wall, but there were many who were willing to fill the gasket, fill it with lime, prepare all this, not by order, but by desire." "In the construction of a real temple," continues Father Rebrin, "the same spirit, the same zeal guided that prompted our ancestors to build ordinary temples. Here there was no pestilence, no drought, nothing external, no vow was made, but there was internal unanimity and agreement in the "holy cause," as the people say. And now the church is called "our holy mother".

Father Rebrin gives several more examples of the unusually fast construction of stone churches with the unanimous and, of course, free participation of many; for example, in the village of Ilenskoye, "they bring so much brick, lime, water that the scaffolding breaks down, only the contractor has time." And in the village of Useninovskoye there was neither a contractor nor an architect, "but they built such a church that even the townspeople were delighted with its beauty "they envy". The latter case, it should be noted, took place a hundred years ago.

The spirit that created ordinary churches has recently manifested itself, among other things, in the construction of a church from old rails by workers at the Bezhitsk plant in one day. The newspaper "Russkoe Slovo", which published the news of this construction, this manifestation of the old spirit in a new form, the Russian spirit in Western European clothing, called it a good initiative. The Bryansk "Vestnik" objected to the one-day construction of the church from rails. But in this objection, or refutation, one can see a brilliant confirmation of the news published in "Russkoe Slovo" under the title "Good Initiative" 45. According to the testimony of the "Bryansk Vestnik" itself, the church of St. The Church of the Apostles Peter and Paul was built three times, and all three times in a short time: the first time it was built in less than six months, for it was consecrated in June of the same year 1882, in which it was founded; the second time - in eleven days, in winter, during the shortest winter days, from St. Spyridon (December 12, the turn of the sun to summer, and winter to frost) to Anastasia the Deliverer from Bonds (December 22); construction in such a short time was conditioned, of course, by the desire of the parishioners to have a church by the great holiday of the Nativity of Christ **************** , and the third time this same church, built in eleven days, according to the Bryansk Herald, was moved to another place in 1894 and consecrated on January 15, 1895. Unfortunately, the Bryansk Herald kept silent about the time of the foundation of the Peter and Paul Church for the first time and did not indicate when its transfer began for the third time, well aware, of course, that the one-day period is important only in the sense of the short duration of construction, important because it requires the greatest combination of forces. In the preface to the Tale of the Construction of an Ordinary Church in Vologda it is said: "at least not ordinary, but built with the general participation", and the Bryansk Herald kept silent about the method by which the above-mentioned church was built, i.e. whether by hiring or by the desire and participation in the work of the parishioners themselves, i.e. the factory workers. "Bryansk Herald" did not mention the material from which the Peter and Paul Church was built, although the fact that it was built twice in 1882, the second time in just eleven winter days, and also the transfer of this church to another location in 1894 shows that this church was not built of stone or brick, but in all likelihood, of rails and wood. It is impossible not to notice that the construction period cannot but be influenced by the material from which the building is made; if ordinary churches made of wood are possible, then for churches made of brick, according to our current method of preparing this material, a one-day construction period is impossible - for them there will be their shortest construction period, corresponding to the one-day period for churches made of wood; in the same way, for churches made of old rails and wood (together) there will probably be their shortest period.

The same spirit that created ordinary churches was, of course, also manifested in the construction of the church in the village. Kashirskoe, Moscow volost, Voronezh district and province, with the money received for grain from a plot of land allocated for public plowing. At the end of the eighties, the Moscow volost elder Pyotr Savelyevich Afonin, at a meeting of peasants from the village of Kashirskoe, who had long wanted to have a church in their village, proposed to allocate a plot of land of two hundred and fifty dessiatines and cultivate it themselves, and to use the money received for the grain sold from this plot to build a church. At first, Afonin encountered strong opposition to his idea in the person of the most influential and authoritative public figures, and especially in the person of the most influential of them, Miron Nikitich Polezhaev, an intelligent, experienced and pious man; he demonstrated the complete impossibility of construction in this way and predicted that the church would never be finished and the community would only be "overwhelmed" by this matter. Finally, after much deliberation, Afonin overcame his prejudice. A verdict was drawn up, the land was allocated, it was plowed, sowed, and the first harvest yielded more than ten thousand in income, so that in the fall it was possible to begin preparing materials, and in the spring to begin work. The following harvests were also good, and in about four years a magnificent, huge church had grown up. Everyone was amazed that such a magnificent temple had been built in four years without any monetary contributions, and by the labor of the parishioners - labor that was not at all burdensome, lively, and brief. The example of the Kashirans was followed by the peasants of the village of Biryuchensky. The Kashirans were very grateful to Afonin for his idea. All work on the land allocated for public plowing was carried out mostly on holidays and is very similar to the pulleys and tolokas, even to the construction of ordinary churches; and, of course, the more they will present similarities with these latter, as a sacred matter, as if already a divine service, the more perfect will be the work. It is necessary not to forget that churches - and this is especially evident in ordinary churches - are not only buildings intended for the prayerful assembly of believers, as the Governing Synod expressed in the decree which prohibits the arrangement the presence of monuments in the temples themselves and lattices over those buried in them (in the temples), and houses of prayer and even prayer itself... According to the stories of the son of an entrepreneur 46, the initiator of the case of public ploughing for the construction of churches, the grain collected from the plot of land allocated by the Kashira residents for the construction of the temple was brought to the site of the future temple; here it was stacked, here it was threshed by pomocha and toloka. However, the last word in the village of Kashirskoye and in the whole of that area is completely unknown... In public ploughing, allocated for the construction of temples, the earth itself, its fruitful power, is called upon for the sacred work of building a temple, the house of God; and if it is a temple-school, in that case the ashes of the fathers, serving for the construction of the temple of the God of the fathers, or the temple-museum, would serve thereby to return the hearts of the sons to the fathers...

At the present time, when in the draft of the new charter on public food supplies public ploughing is indicated, or allowed, it is desirable that part of them be designated, or applied, for the construction and maintenance of schools-temples, and moreover with the promise of commemoration especially, of a considerable number of all participants in the public ploughing and their parents, with the promise of commemoration not only by name, but in the form of a story about the common work of construction and about the greater or lesser participation of each in this work, as well as in the form of images of all the builders of the temple in a prayerful position in its lower part under the icons of the saints. Peasants, as they say, are very reluctant to work in the public ploughed fields intended for filling public stores with grain in case of crop failure, and therefore it is very important to give at least part of this work a sacred purpose, so that the peasants, going out to work, would know that they are bringing a sacrifice to God with their labor. By such a purpose of this part, all work in the public ploughed fields would be sanctified, the direct purpose of which is to provide against crop failure, as part of the sanitary and food issue, which should be religiousized, for bread is produced by farmers, i.e. sons, not only to feed the living, but also to commemorate the dead. The temple, the house of prayer, is therefore connected with the house of learning and knowledge - the school, because prayer is offered so that the Lord would teach, reveal to us the ways and means of salvation from hunger and plagues, as consequences of our sins; and the school is appointed not only for teaching, but also for expanding the field of knowledge, and not in the form of only knowing evil and good, but in the form of eradicating the former, i.e. evil, and establishing the latter, i.e. good. The introduction of public ploughs can also be one of the very important means of implementing the project of the widespread construction of church-schools, for the five hundredth anniversary of the discovery of the relics of St. Sergius 47.

So, it turns out that not only has the spirit that manifested itself in the construction of ordinary churches not disappeared, but, as we will now see, the very idea of ​​​​building an ordinary church in the year of the five hundredth anniversary of the memory of St. Sergius, in 1892, has been revived. This idea could not fail to be revived at that time, for only in the land of ordinary churches - these monuments of unanimity and harmony - could the great venerator of the Most Holy Trinity as a model of unanimity and harmony, who built a temple with fraternal labor, which was to serve as a mirror for the community life he had introduced. The spirit that animated St. Sergius was the same spirit that built ordinary temples, and when honoring the memory of St. Sergius, it was very natural to revive the idea of ​​building an ordinary temple... "So it came into the hearts of the citizens to create an altar to the name of the Lord and they made a promise in their hearts," says the story about the construction of an ordinary temple in Vologda 48; something similar is happening and has happened in our time, in 1892: in issue 254 of the Moskovskiye Vedomosti of that year, an article was published proposing to create an ordinary church at the church of the Moscow Rumyantsev Museum of St. Sergius and St. Nicholas the Wonderworker—venerators of the Holy Trinity—and to create this church in the name of the Holy Trinity. This proposal was prompted, on the one hand, by the desire to see with one’s own eyes the church that St. Sergius and his brother erected for the Holy Trinity. Trinity and which was so vividly described by the Metropolitan of Moscow Philaret 49, and on the other hand, the plague (cholera), which appeared then in Moscow and throughout Russia, and even in Western Europe... Making such a proposal, the author of the article, among other things, said: “In our time, when social issues are being intensely developed and there is a heated struggle over them, when the human mind is tormented in languor, seeking and not finding in its creations a model and guidance for society, let temples be erected again in the name of the Holy Trinity, the Most High, the Most Holy, the Life-giving, the only, true prototype for the life of society.” Unfortunately, this place was omitted by the editors of the newspaper 50. Despite this omission, however, the idea expressed in the article (in the form of a letter to the editor) was met, at least by some, with great sympathy, while by others, with great anger, and although donations had already begun to flow in to implement this idea—one donation was even a thousand rubles—the idea, nevertheless, was not implemented. The opponents of the construction ki called such a temple a bonfire, hinting at the danger of fire. But if the temple had been built, it would certainly have been made of wood impregnated with a fireproof composition; and such a building would have suggested the need to impregnate everything wooden in the museum with a fireproof composition; and then the fire in the museum in 1896 would have become impossible, it would have been prevented... 51

A year later, in the preface to the "Tale of the Construction of an Everyday Church in Vologda" (Readings in the Society of Russian History and Antiquities, 1893, v. 166) this idea was again mentioned, and it received even more development: in the article of 1892 it was said: "let churches be erected again in the name of the Holy Trinity", and here it was already indicated the need to build in memory of the all-Russian miracle worker, revered by the Old Believers, for the five hundredth anniversary of the day of his glorification - July 5, 1922 - churches of the Life-Giving Trinity at all churches in all cities and villages, and in the latter in particular; moreover, these churches of the Most Holy Trinity churches, although not ordinary, but created with the participation of all, being, thus, the fruit of mental and physical labor, the fruit of knowledge and art of all Russia, can and should be schools, and at the same time repositories of ancient icons, utensils that have fallen out of use, in a word, they should be museums, not neglecting, following the example of ancient Russia, and monuments of secular origin. And the churches themselves, in their architecture and utensils, should be an image of antiquity and be distinguished not by wealth, but rather by the poverty of material, but by the richness of content, as it was in ancient Russia, when icons were depicted on vestments instead of the current, meaningless, ornaments. This, perhaps, would be a step towards reconciliation with the Old Believers. Everything in the church-school should be distinguished by its instructiveness and serve to revive and resurrect antiquity in the minds and hearts of the students. With such a celebration of the memory of the glorification of St. Sergius, temples-schools, i.e. the inseparability of baptism and anointing from the upbringing and education of children, or the inseparability of spiritual from secular education, the highest and fullest expression of which would be the adoption of all fathers by God, temples-schools, which are currently being built here and there, would be built everywhere, throughout Russia, and this would be a new posthumous miracle of St. Sergius. For the completeness of general education, however, it is not enough to build only schools-temples, where baptism and anointing are not separated from upbringing and education, it is also necessary to turn prisons into correctional schools, bringing them closer to the temple, and then repentance will not be separated from correction. The Temple of the Most Holy The Trinity, which is proposed to be erected at the church of the Moscow Rumyantsev Museum, should be a model for those school-temples that are proposed to be built everywhere for the five hundredth anniversary of the discovery of the relics of St. Sergius. These school-temples, erected everywhere for the sake of salvation from hunger (from lack of rain and much rain) and pestilence, should not be alien to the study of the force that carries hunger, plagues and death, as is said in the article "On the monument to Karazin" ("Science and Life", 1894, No. 15-16-y 35).

The construction of such school-temples everywhere will not, at the same time, also become the fulfillment by the successors of St. Vladimir of the duty of universal compulsory education, assumed by St. Vladimir himself and his successors as the receiver of the Russian people from the baptismal font. In our time, when forests are almost destroyed, and the construction of church-schools everywhere is only a question of time, and a very short time at that, churches made of iron instead of wood, like the church built from rails by workers at the Bezhitsk plant, is a phenomenon that is extremely remarkable. Old Rus', with its abundance of forests, built churches of wood in one day; new Rus', with its depleted forests, has found new material for the construction of churches by joint efforts and in almost the same short time. This new material, which will become more abundant the more railroads are built, will make it possible to build church-schools even in treeless steppes, and can greatly facilitate the implementation of the plan to celebrate the anniversary of St. Sergius by building school-churches dedicated to the Holy Trinity, by July 5, 1922. The construction by the joint work of all, in whose midst there now reigns discord, the source of poverty and all vices, the construction of schools-temples of the Holy Trinity, the purpose of which is to maintain unity, to constantly keep the mind at the height of veneration of the Triune God, is the necessary completion of every church. The enlightenment of the parish will begin only when it understands that nothing can please its patron, to whom the temple is dedicated (be it a saint, the Mother of God, or Christ Himself), as much as by building at its temple a temple in the name of the Holy Trinity, i.e. such a temple or church that leads to the knowledge of the Triune, i.e. a temple-school. Schools-temples of the Holy Trinity, built by common labor, will replace the former baptisteries, which among the people who accepted baptism without catechumenate, as children are baptized, should be schools. The entire host of saints would rejoice in heaven with St. Sergius at the head, when he saw on on the ground at the temples dedicated to them, the temples of the Holy Trinity, which they honor in heaven and which was forgotten on earth; i.e., there will be great joy in heaven when the plan that follows from the very course of our history, our life, is realized... Both Catholics and Protestants, Mohammedans and even Jews reproach us for taking saints for gods, and icons for living beings, i.e., they reproach us for paganism and idolatry; the construction of a school-temple dedicated to the Holy Trinity at each church in an educational, Kachim way, as will be said below. Trinity, and there is a real means of elevating the thought and keeping it at the height of understanding the highest moral significance of the teaching about the Trinity, as the love of sons and daughters (love of children) for the fathers not only living, but also especially dead, in the likeness of the boundless love of the Son of God and the Holy Spirit for God the Father; and such a disclosure of the meaning of the Holy Trinity would eliminate the possibility of both the first reproach, and even more the second, for with an understanding of the moral significance of the Trinity, it will become unthinkable to accept icons as living beings, since icon painting makes only the invisible visible and until the general resurrection, when we will see them (invisible now) face to face ... That the above-mentioned reproach is not entirely unfounded and that only the means proposed here can free us from this reproach, is evidenced by the following story, briefly borrowed from a letter dated November 7, 1894, from a priest of the village. Alferyevsky Mosalsky district of Kaluga province, father Timofey Pavlovich Tarbeev, and from the chronicle of the village of Alferyevsky attached to this letter, compiled by the father and predecessor of Father Timofey, Pavel Timofeevich Tarbeev.

The village of Alferyevskoye belonged to the Trinity-Sergius Lavra until 1764, and therefore, as one must assume, bore and still bears another name - "Troichino". The temple in this village is dedicated to the Holy Trinity, and the people celebrate the days of St. Sergius, July 5 and September 25, as temple holidays, i.e. the feast of Trinity has been replaced by the feast of St. Sergius; thus, St. Sergius is even preferred to the Holy Trinity. The wonderful story, recorded by Father Pavel in the chronicle of the village of Alferevskoye, about the origin of the icon, which now stands in the church behind the altar, testifies, one might say, to how St. Sergius himself admonished the inhabitants of the village of Alferevskoye in their wrongful preference for him, Sergius, over the Holy Trinity, which the saint himself revered above all else. The nun Maria, who was carrying with her a cross with particles of the life-giving tree and with particles of the relics of St. Sergius, was traveling along the Moscow-Varshavskoye highway, one verst from the village of Alferevskoye, and consequently from the Church of the Holy Trinity located in this village, dropped this cross with the relics of the miracle worker; at the request of the peasants who found it, the cross was brought into the Church of the Holy Trinity, and thus St. Sergius did not remain outside the church of the Holy Trinity he revered. Trinity, and entered it in the form of particles of relics that were in the cross. And then, when the cross was returned to its proper place, the nun Maria did not dare to keep it for herself, but painted an icon herself, on which she presented the image of the Holy Trinity, carried by St. Sergius and his successor St. Nikon, cut the miraculous cross into this icon and sent it in this form to the Trinity Church in the village of Alferevskoye, where it was placed behind the altar. And should not the residents of the village of Alferevskoye see in this icon a direct reproach to themselves, which St. Sergius makes to them for the preference shown to him over the Holy Trinity. The parishioners of the village of Alferevskoye would, of course, act in accordance with this instruction of St. Sergius, if, without abandoning the veneration of the saint himself, they honored the Holy Trinity by building a church-school dedicated to the Trinity. And it is desirable that this new, hitherto little-known, posthumous miracle of St. Sergius, having become widely known, would inspire parishioners of all churches in Russia to purchase for each parish for their church an icon of the saint to whom it is dedicated, carrying in his hands the Holy Trinity Church-school (with, for example, an image of the Trinity on the church and with children inside the church), and thus would contribute to the implementation of the plan to build schools-churches in the name of the Holy Trinity everywhere by July 5, 1922, i.e. by the five hundredth anniversary of the glorification of St. Sergius.

In justification of the residents of the village of Alferevskoye, it must be said, however, that they are not the only ones who prefer St. Sergius to the Trinity; so, calling the posad at the Trinity-Sergius Lavra, instead of Troitskoye or, at least, Troitskoye-Sergiyevsky, as it should be, simply Sergievsky, do we not give such preference to Sergius over the Trinity, as the inhabitants of the village of Alferyevskoye. Calling the posad Sergievsky, we do this, of course, without thinking, without realizing what we are doing, what we are saying, but does this not indicate that we are still in unconscious, so to speak, paganism; and meanwhile, Sergius, erecting the temple of the Trinity, had in mind, of course, to raise, to elevate the thought, the consciousness of the paganized, one must assume, Rus' of that time. We do not consciously commit a sin against the Trinity here, but unconsciously we obviously remain in paganism... By the same unconsciousness, not thinking about what they say, write and they print, and this very unfortunate, although at the same time instructive phenomenon is explained, that the very newspaper that rejoiced, as a good initiative, in the construction of an ordinary church from old rails, and rejoiced at this especially because new and abundant building material was found, which facilitates “to a significant extent the implementation of that plan for celebrating the five hundredth anniversary of the discovery of the holy relics of St. Sergius, which is mentioned in the preface to the story about the construction of an ordinary church in Vologda” 52, the same newspaper then cited the opinion of the Most Reverend. Dionysius of Ufa (who died in 1897 or 1898), who allegedly does not allow the construction of church-schools in his diocese, finding it “incompatible to have a school building where children laugh, quarrel, and curse next to the Holy of Holies, from which the classrooms of the students in church-schools are separated only by a thin partition” 53; as if a thick partition would prevent the Omniscient from hearing abuse?!.. And is it really possible for such a strange, to say the least, opinion about churches-schools and a completely pagan concept of God on the part of the archpastor?!.. If children cannot be allowed into the temple when the Holy of Holies is separated by a thin partition, then the question naturally arises whether it is possible to allow them into the temple at all, i.e. when the Holy of Holies is not separated from the temple by anything?!.. The Apostles also did not want to allow children to Christ; But can the successors of the apostles repeat the same mistake?!.. Children prove strong enough to insult the holy place, and the holy place is supposedly powerless to ennoble the mischief inherent in childhood?!.. Thus, the indication of the incompatibility of school with the temple has not, on the contrary, proven the absolute necessity of a school in the temple of Christ, not only a lover of mankind, but also an even greater lover of children. The separation of school from temple is useful only for the preservation of paganism... Let us also remember that the Holy of Holies is placed even in prisons, among criminals, and it has never occurred to anyone to find this incompatible; following the opinion attributed to the "Russian Word" of His Eminence, Dionysius 54, criminals, villains, robbers can in no way be admitted to the temple... In fact, for the unification to be complete and effective, the prisons themselves would have to be converted into correctional schools and brought closer to the temple, as has already been said, so that the sacrament of repentance would become a real correction, so that catechumens of this kind would finally become faithful. Metropolitan Philaret, in one of his words at the consecration of the church in the prison, asked the question whether it was possible to place a church in the prison, and found that this question had been decided at Golgotha, where Christ was crucified between two thieves 55. And does not such a resolution of the question indicate that churches in prisons should be dedicated to the prudent thief? This would express hope for the success of the catechumenate in converting the penitents into the faithful. To prove that children are not only prone to mischief, which is, however, quite excusable and inexcusable only by those who themselves have never been children or have forgotten too deeply that they themselves were children, have forgotten, despite the fact that preserving childish purity, being children is the first duty of a Christian, - to prove that children are capable of not only violating the sanctity of a place, but also participating in the creation of a holy place, and such a holy place cannot be considered other than a church-school, we refer here to the construction of church schools in Mordovsky and Russky Kachimy, Gorodishchensky district, Penza province. Although in Kachimy, not church-schools were built, but only church-parish schools, the method by which these schools were built is even more applicable to the construction of church-schools. The school in Mordovian Kachim was built in 1892, in the year and at the very time when Moscow went to Trinity, and perhaps through the prayers of pilgrims to the Holy Trinity, this God-pleasing and pleasing to the Triune God unification of the forces of many for a single cause, for the construction of a church school, took place, the purpose of which is, should be and can be only in perpetuating the union of unanimity, brotherhood, in perpetuating that feeling which alone makes us like the Triune God as a model of agreement and unanimity, by which alone the disciples of Christ are known. And we cannot but hope that this event will finally find a worthy connoisseur and will become the beginning of a new life for us, and then there will be not a story, not a poem, but a true story about how children, i.e. sons and daughters of Mordvin peasants built a school with the help of their fathers, relatives and spiritual (priest and teacher), and especially with the help of those two men who can be called godparents, godfathers of the church school, namely, the church watchman (reserve non-commissioned officer) and that great man who went from hut to hut, asked, begged and, finally, achieved the goal!.. May his name be blessed from now on and forever! This is Kachimsky Karazin, that Karazin who begged the Ukrainian nobility on his knees for a donation for the establishment of the University; and more than Karazin, because Karazin could be a model only for a small class, and the Kachimsky peasant will be a model for all peasants. In extolling the work of children and the peasant's assistance in building the school, we certainly do not wish to belittle the merits of the priest and teacher, from whom we learned about the children and the peasant 56.

The Kachimsky event has been described more than once, and has never been appreciated at its true worth, in a worthy manner. The writer of the Diocesan Gazette apparently does not assume - or perhaps does not say out of modesty, since he himself took part in this - what a great significance and meaning lies in the joint, harmonious work of fathers and children! And yet, here is the beginning of the reconciliation of fathers and children, "to turn the hearts of fathers to children" 57, which will be fully understandable only in a school-temple erected by all the living for prayer to the Life-Giving Trinity for all the dead, for prayer inseparable from common, life-giving labor. We cannot but regret that the author of the Diocesan Gazette even disparages, unintentionally of course, children's work, calling it ant work 58; and this at a time when naturalists, and not only naturalists, are trying to equate the ant with man, although they have not yet, as far as we know, discovered schools in anthills, and they completely mistakenly think that they have found there a burial similar to a human one. If there is something similar to a burial in anthills, then it is not similar to a human, not a religious, and not even a civil burial, but to one that still appears as an ideal in the minds of a few, the most advanced intellectuals, for whom the burial of the dead is equal to the removal of all impurities; and when this ideal is achieved, realized, when the highest stage of progress is reached, then, indeed, every difference between man and ant and animals in general will disappear... Even more deserving of regret is the opinion of the professor of canon law (in the "Theological Herald" of 1893, No. 4), who, although he calls the Kachim event small only in appearance, but very significant in the life of the Russian Church, at the same time equates this event with such phenomena, which have nothing in common with it, as teachers working for very small remuneration, finding in this meager payment not only physical suffering, but supposedly moral humiliation, i.e. measuring the dignity of a person by the size of his salary. In describing the Kachim event, the professor does not deign to name even the main figures, the peasant and the watchman, and designates them only by letters - M.V. and M.B. 59; and meanwhile, who knows, perhaps the peasant Maxim Vasilyevich Merkuryev and the watchman Maxim Belyanin will become famous wherever there are schools, and the name of the professor will be forgotten, just as we know the name of poor Lazarus and do not know the name of the rich man, from whose table Lazarus ate crumbs; the name of the professor will be forgotten, of course, not forever, but only until universal knowledge comes, knowledge by all of everyone...

In the unification of the weak forces of children to build a school, one cannot help but see a great goal, undoubtedly felt and recognized by them, a goal that united them for voluntary labor. Here is not the aimless labor of Zola, but at the same time a refutation by the deed itself, a refutation flowing from the sincere and pure - at least in these labor minutes - children's hearts, and the strongest refutation of Tolstoy's "inaction" ... 60 In addition, this construction of a school by children is the boldest violation of all the laws of political and social economy. In the entire West, near (Europe) and far (America), our great story will be called a fairy tale, a fable, and moreover an immoral one, since it teaches gratuitous labor, unpaid labor, labor not limited to an eight-hour period, child labor, and, finally, collective labor, the labor of the crowd, which the latest science likens to mental epidemics, epidemic mental illnesses. During the construction of the Kachim school, according to legend, even the hired carpenters worked not as mercenaries, but as friends of the school. In what way this friendship for the school was expressed, the legend does not say; but there is no doubt that the carpenters did not reduce the working day to eight hours, did not demand sixteen hours of idleness, the carpenters realized, of course, that they were working for a holy cause, and their work was moral and educational. Not the demand for a reduction in labor, but the demand for participation in intellectual labor, the right to such labor, the right to participate in a moral cause, this is the only legal demand, the only legal right; the demand for a reduction in labor cannot be recognized as legal. (See No. 15-16, Science and Life, 1894, epigraph to the article “On the Monument to Karazin” and the 2nd column of page 250 of this article—“Unification of all in the knowledge and influence on that force which punishes with death (famine, epidemics, earthquakes, etc.) for ignorance”). This story, i.e. the very fact of building a school through the combined labor of many, undoubtedly proves that what is called a crowd, or rabble, of people who are not outstanding in any way, lacks only a field, lacks a great deed, to become heroes. For us, this story, i.e. the story of how children built a school, will become the first children's book (instead of a hundred different Robinsons, as their complete opposite), the first lesson in morality, which will be read not only by children, but also by adults and elders. This tale will be higher than the Iliad, although the Iliad does not describe war, but mourns those who fell in war, higher than the Odyssey, although the Odyssey tells not only about the wanderings of the father, but also about the son's search for his father, not to mention the Robinsonades, which aim to extol solitary work, the possibility for a person to get by with his own strength. The tale about children building a school can and should end with the words of Christ: "be like children", addressed to everyone, to Russia, to the whole world, words that will acquire especially great meaning with the construction of Holy Trinity churches and schools everywhere. Every village, creating a school-temple at its church, dedicated to the Holy Trinity - a model of unanimity, one-mindedness and agreement - creating this temple-school by joint labor, will, of course, strive to surpass Mordovskiy Kachim, both in general friendly work and in individual cases, in detail. Having built a temple-school, every village will receive its own epic, which will become the beginning of the chronicle and history of the formation of this village 61, i.e. a greater and greater unification of all in the work of gradually expanding knowledge of the sky (atmospheric and other phenomena, knowledge of the earth as a celestial body, as a star) and the conversion, thus, of people into celestials in the moral and material sense. (See No. 44 “Science and Life”, 1893 “The Question of the Karazin Meteorological Station in Moscow” 62. “Meteorology, as knowledge of the atmosphere, is a part of astronomy or astronomy itself. Man can see the outer side of the atmosphere only on other planets and suns, and he can observe the inner and lower side only on the earthly planet.”)

The beginning of an art museum was also laid in Kachim, and this beginning has all the more moral significance because it serves as a commentary on the words of the Savior - “be like children,” and at the same time as an indication of the complete absence of tribal enmity, discord, and even mutual goodwill of such distantly related tribes as the Russian and Finnish. The students of the Russo-Kachim school chipped in to purchase a painting of the "Twelve-Year-Old Jesus in the Temple" and presented it to their Mordvin-Kachim comrades on the day of the consecration of their school 63. With this meaningful gift they wished their brothers to be like this youth, to serve in their temple the God of the fathers, Mordvin and Russian, growing in wisdom and love for God and for all people. The legend does not say how the students of Mordvin Kachim, these builders of the school, who laid, as the legend says, its cornerstone, and whose zeal was held up as an example to their fathers, responded to their Russian comrades (p. 856. Construction of the church-parish school in Mordvin Kachim); but how could they respond to their Russian comrades for such goodwill, if not by presenting an image, or a picture-icon, as they say now, an image of Christ blessing the children, wishing them to be these children who have received a blessing from Christ; and it would be good if this wish could be expressed by a portrait of the students of the Russian-Kachim school. Such an image may seem indecent for the new Protestant Russia, but undoubtedly it would be approved by ancient Russia. By exchanging icons, the Mordvins and Rus would become cross brothers, would unite in one brotherhood... While recognizing the universal kinship of the human race, one cannot help but admit that the Mordvins and Rus are very distant relatives, their kinship is no closer than the kinship of the English with the American Indians, and therefore the rapprochement of Rus and Mordvins consists of exposing the discord of very closely related peoples and tribes, and the exposure is all the greater, the closer the kinship of the warring parties. The depiction of the builders of the temple-school, each separately and especially in their collective work, just as the construction of an ordinary temple is depicted in the current Spasobydenskaya Church in Vologda ***************** , could lay the foundation for a museum of paintings and portraits; this would be a temple for the formation of the people and an instructive monument-museum, because a school-temple dedicated to the Holy Trinity is only an abbreviated expression, the full expression would be: a school as a union of all the living (children-students and fathers-teachers) and a museum as a collection of images of all the dead (facial synodicon) in the temple of the Trinity, reviving all the dead through the mediation, i.e., by the labor or action, of the living.

In order to fully appreciate the Kachim event, it is necessary to know how the school arose, the students of which later built their school building. It turns out that before the construction of the school building, the Kachim school was located in a simple village hut, tree stumps and tubs replaced benches in it... This beginning alone makes one expect a lot... And indeed, it was from this school, created, one might say, from nothing, that the children, the builders of the new school, emerged. And it will be a great pity if the new school does not preserve for the memory of future generations of teachers and students at least one of the stumps of the old school. The founder of this original school was a man who he could have taken the position of professor in a higher school (master of a theological academy), but he preferred a lower school to a higher one, a rural backwater to a capital or city life. The school founded in Mordvin Kachim by a master was preceded by a school founded in Russian Kachim by a seminarian, the brother of a master-demist, and probably on the same principles, i.e. money was replaced by one's own labor. “He (the master) loved school with all his soul, he liked life in the village, life with his parents,” writes the father of this master, a respected priest of Russky Kachim, the dean of his district, who probably intended his son for a more prominent, more secure position than a village teacher, a teacher not even of a zemstvo school, but of a church parish school, which does not even have the meager provision that a teacher of a zemstvo school can count on... This is a truly fruitful return to the village!.. And that's not all... In Russky Kachim, as it turns out, there is, in addition, another two-grade school, founded by the father of an academician and seminarian, which supplies teachers from among the peasants to other schools and even schools in neighboring dioceses, Saratov and Simbirsk, near the borders of which Kachim is located 65. We cite this information from a letter not intended for publication, communicated to us by one, perhaps the only one donor to the Mordovsko-Kachimskaya school 66. Thus, the Mordovsko-Kachimskaya school, whose students became the builders of the school building, like everything truly great, was created, one might say, from nothing in the material sense; money appeared only when everything essential already existed, created by labor alone, and by labor, of course, voluntary. The conversion of the gratuitous into the labor, of the compulsory into the voluntary, is the task of the school, for labor is the highest virtue, likening us to God, who created everything from nothing. Of course, this virtue belongs only to God ("My Father has worked hitherto, and I work" 67), Who creates from nothing - creation from nothing is the unconditional negation of the gratuitous. The construction of the Mordovsko-Kachimskaya school, as well as the other schools mentioned here, if children took part in their construction, serves as the best refutation of the opponents of schools-temples, who do not want to admit either schools or children into temples. The Mordov-Kachim school is also a true manifestation of the spirit that was expressed in former times in the construction of ordinary churches; and if it were not only a church school, but a church-school in its fullest expression, i.e. combining the secular and the spiritual, then in its construction the spirit that created ordinary churches would have found its full expression.

In order to arouse movement in the matter of education, it is necessary to create a story about the construction of the Kachim school, worthy of the event. Unfortunately, the Lavra itself did not pay attention to this event, although the construction of the Kachim school coincided with the five hundredth anniversary of the death of St. Sergius, and the story about this construction was placed in the jubilee, one might say, issue of the Penza Diocesan Gazette, which included both a speech on the day of the five hundredth anniversary and an article about the significance of St. Sergius in the Russian Church and State 68. And yet, does it not lie with the Lavra’s duty to teach all of Russia to honor the Holy Trinity, to honor it in the same way that St. Sergius honored it, having built with his own hands a temple to the Holy Trinity as a mirror, as an example for those gathered by him into a single life, does it not lie with the Lavra’s duty to teach all of Russia to honor the Holy Trinity in practice—by building Her temple-schools with their combined efforts and voluntary labor; and this would be a feat equal to the feat of Dionysius and Abraham Palitsyn 69. The story about the construction of the Kachim school should contain both praise for the Mordovian Kachim for the construction of a church school through the unanimous labor of many, and the wish for him to expand and elevate his church school through the unanimous labor of not only many, but all without exception, to a school-temple dedicated to the highest example of peace and harmony, the Holy Trinity, so that he, the Mordovian Kachim, would thus become a mirror for imitation for all of Russia in general and the intelligentsia in particular, a mirror for imitation in collective, common work of all fathers, sons and daughters, in work, in labor, which is the greatest, highest virtue... We have already said above that the entire host of saints would rejoice in heaven with St. Sergius at the head, when he saw on earth, at the temples dedicated to them, the temples of the Holy Trinity, Whom the saints honor in heaven and Who was forgotten on earth, i.e. great will be the joy in heaven when the plan that follows from the very course of our history, our life, is realized. The earth would also rejoice, if only it understood what is being offered to it... Unfortunately, the earth has not yet come to this understanding, and when it will come, no one knows; rejoicing not only on earth, but also in heaven depends on the earth, on us and, above all, on the writers who hold the keys to understanding in their hands, on writers who, unfortunately, know only their rights and very poorly understand their duties, and especially the common duty, the common obligation, which consists in assisting in the creation of a school-temple, and at the same time a school-museum, i.e. such a school in which there would be no hostility between the spiritual and the secular, where both would find their reconciliation, such a school that would have a sacred and even highly sacred character, because it would be a school-temple dedicated (in memory of St. Sergius) to the Holy Trinity. Such a school, one must hope, would not find enemies in the persons of those whom the Kachim school had as its enemies, and had them, perhaps, only because it was a school, albeit a church school, but not a temple-school.

Judging by the fact that the Kachimskaya parish school attracted a donation from a secular writer, the author of “An Analysis of the Views of Zola, Dumas, and Tolstoy on Labor” (Kozhevnikov—“Aimless Labor. Inaction” or Deed”), one can assume that school-temples dedicated to the Holy Trinity in its highly moral meaning, in the spiritual and social, so to speak, sense, school-temples that the Russian land should create for itself everywhere for the day of remembrance of its spiritual enlightener and collector (St. Sergius) and add to them, for the day of remembrance of the founder of secular education (the founder of the Ministry of People’s Education—Karazin), school-museums, one can assume that such school-temples and school-museums 70 will, according to the moral duty imposed history, the donation not only of the people, who willingly donate only to churches, but also of the intelligentsia, who are perhaps ready to donate to schools and are not very inclined to give anything to churches; they will evoke donations for what cannot be created by the labor of direct builders, and donations not only of money, but mainly of things, church utensils of an archaeological nature, books, tools, etc.; and thus, everyone would take part in this jubilee work... However, in order to elicit donations for schools and temples from the intelligentsia (there is no doubt about donations from the people, following the example of the Kachim school), - from the intelligentsia, accustomed to looking at the separation of the spiritual from the secular as some kind of good, it is necessary that the intelligentsia recognize the conversion of the gratuitous into the laborious, the compulsory into the voluntary, and in general, common, collective labor - as the highest virtue, as such a virtue that is unconditionally attributed only to God, who created everything from nothing, for creation from nothing is the unconditional negation of the gratuitous, given in advance. Man cannot create from nothing, but the Creator from nothing can, of course, through him, through man, recreate and create everything. The transformation of the gratuitous into the laborious is the realization of the goal, the good, the kindness, the kingdom of God, immortality, resurrection. On the first question 71, posed under the title of this article, i.e. on the question “was there anything similar, analogous to our ordinary churches in the West and were they not borrowed from there by us?” in the “Russian Archive” for 1894, a note was placed in which this question was posed on a psychological basis, on the basis of collective psychology 72; and from this point of view, the construction of ordinary churches should be recognized as a manifestation of religious upsurge, i.e. it will correspond to what in the West—and especially in the distant one, in America—is called revivals, revivals, i.e. revivals, awakenings of religious feelings, or more precisely they could be called religious explosions. These religious explosions occur mainly in America, a country of civil and political equality and religious inequality, a country where, one might say, there is no religion for the poor, no temples, no place or anything that would serve to satisfy the religious feelings of the poor, since in American temples all places are leased and at a high price, and therefore, in order to enter an American temple, one must first pay dearly for it 73.

Our religious upsurges, which built temples in one day or night, were caused by natural disasters, such as droughts, epidemics, etc. In a small form, these upsurges occur very often with us, almost every year, and sometimes several times in one summer, and are expressed in common prayers for rain, religious processions through the fields, etc. But the upsurges reach their highest manifestation in times of extraordinary disasters and are expressed in the construction of ordinary temples. Western revivals, such as the revival of 1857-58, which began in New York 74, are usually caused by industrial and commercial crises. Religious revival, both here and in the West, begins with repentance; but here the similarity ends. Our repentance was not limited to contrition, but turned into action, into the action of building churches, which was accomplished by decision of the entire world (i.e., at veche, secular gatherings), such a decision was reached instantly, unanimously, without any debate; at religious meetings in America, repentance was expressed in self-flagellation, turning "into wails, sobs, groans, cries, gnashing of teeth, tearing of hair." Such repentance was initially manifested in a few, the most inclined to it, then little by little it infected others, passed on to everyone, and in some it reached the highest degree, “to rage, to convulsions, it was expressed wildly "they rolled their eyes, foamed at the mouth." Such excitement must have some kind of outlet, and it found it at first in self-flagellation, and then turned into "quarrels, fights between the repentant, and even murder" 75. Repentance turned into crime, thus confirming the view of Western psychologists on the collective activity of the crowd as a mental epidemic. Reading stories about revivalists, one might think that religious upsurges, at least in our time, can only lead to such outrages as described above; therefore, it is important to know the manifestation of these upsurges in another form, in another way. Our (our revivalists) revival was expressed not in personal repentance, not in discord, but [in] diligent, friendly, amazingly fast work, which brings delight, evokes tears of emotion in those present and participating in this work - "for they were honored to see what their fathers did not see" 76. Everyday churches are monuments of unanimity and agreement in prayer and work, in thought and deed, an agreement so rare on earth in general, and in Russia in particular. At the usually stormy veche, silence was immediately restored when the matter concerned the construction of an ordinary church, and the issue was decided without debate, unanimously and instantly. These are very rare, bright moments in the history of cities, for which the Time of Troubles was a normal state. Unanimity, the closest union produced even more than promised: they gave a vow to build a church in one day, and built it "in "one morning." The shortness of time in which "the Lord granted to build the temple" 77 produces the greatest delight. In this promise, just given and immediately fulfilled, there was a certain semblance of "It was said and it was." The deed was done as quickly as a fairy tale is told - in one night a whole building arose; the rising sun saw what the setting sun did not see. There was something miraculous in this; this miraculous thing caused delight; and it may well be that this healthy delight produced a cure, stopped the epidemic - this is a natural miracle. Contrary to the views of Western writers, in our country collective activity produced not mental illness, but healing. Thus, one cannot condemn religious upsurges, excitements, even if they manifest themselves in such frenzy as the American revivals, because they manifest themselves in this way due to the lack of a proper field or work; were it otherwise, the excitement expressed in such outrages would produce something great. In the same way, one cannot blame music when, awakening forces, it finds an outlet for them only in crimes, as Tolstoy relates in The Kreutzer Sonata. Revivals are a necessary attribute of Protestant countries and serve, as Lopukhin says, as a protest against the fragmentation characteristic of Protestantism and which has reached its last extremes in America 78. There, in America, one must expect a turn towards unity - that is why, perhaps, Orthodoxy enjoys a favorable reception in America 79. Churches built by joint efforts serve, above all, as an expression of Orthodoxy; even in America itself, according to McGahan, the New York Orthodox Church is "the fruit of the zealous, friendly, common work of Russian people of all classes" 80. Although this church was not built in one day, it has all the essential properties of ordinary churches; whereas the temple in Chicago, built in one day, has almost nothing in common with our ordinary temples. The building of this latter temple was not caused by famine or pestilence, nor was it a monument to the gathering of the land; it was caused by the lack of space for Pastor Williams's readings, which took place in a small Presbyterian church, and for some reason it was decided to hold them for four weeks, morning and evening; after two weeks, due to the large crowd of listeners, a lack of space was discovered; in the third week it was decided to build a temple by Sunday. The temple was not, however, erected by one capitalist, but by subscription, and this subscription took longer than the construction itself; nevertheless, the temple was created by capital and hired labor, and not by voluntary labor, and not from material belonging to the community, that is, to everyone, like the timber in the construction of our ordinary temples. The readings of Pastor Williams, which caused a religious upsurge, a revival, were not moved outdoors only because of the winter and required the construction of a church with stoves (the church was heated by three fireplaces) and lighting 81. The most significant difference between our ordinary churches and the American one is that for us the church is not just a place for prayer, but prayer itself, the work of salvation, even resurrection; the construction of the church is caused not by the cramped space, but by the need for an external expression for prayer, for the outcome of a religious upsurge, for we do not separate prayer from work. But if Russian Orthodoxy remains true to itself in America, then Protestantism, moving to Russia, in the form of the sermons of Redstock, the Pashkovites 82 and the like, remains true to its homeland, Western Europe, and manifests itself in the form of subjective illusions of salvation. Such states can together to become, to infect many, and in essence, represent the same revivals, but in their most initial form, in embryonic form. And, in any case, these identical internal states of many should not be confused with the general upsurge, which has expression in action, in the construction, for example, of a temple, or some other non-temple work. It can be said that Russia, seeing revivals only in their embryonic state, does not know real Protestantism; it must be seen where it does not encounter any obstacles, as, for example, in America, where it manifests itself in revivals that reach the aforementioned outrages.

The Protestant pathological phenomena also include Stundism, Tolstoyism, as well as the Molokans, Dukhobors, all rationalistic and mystical sects... The Old Believers are similar to Orthodoxy, and perhaps these sincere worshipers and lovers of antiquity still retain the custom of building ordinary churches, which has almost disappeared among the Orthodox. Or perhaps, because of the rupture, this holy custom, as an expression of unanimity and agreement, has become alien to both, and can be restored only after their reconciliation... Or will not the very construction of schools-temples dedicated to the Holy Trinity as a model of unanimity and agreement become an expression of reconciliation, moreover, a temple-school with a museum, containing monuments of antiquity, monuments to all the dead, or a museum temple-school, erected by the combined efforts of all the living (sons) for the remembrance of all the dead (fathers) and dedicated to the Holy Trinity, in Whom we honor the boundless love of the Son and the Holy Spirit for God the Father, replace the school, i.e. the current school, which makes us forget our fathers or even arms sons and daughters against their fathers and mothers. At the same time, this museum temple-school, which makes knowledge and veneration of the fathers its object, makes all knowledge of nature a means for expressing this veneration. And, of course, such a school will no longer arouse fears that children will become higher than their father and mother, fears that arise today among peasants.

Thus, ordinary temples, or Orthodox religious revival, renewal, acquire their full meaning only when compared with Western revivals, and especially with the revivals of the Far West. Orthodox revival is expressed not in protest and separation, but in reunification, both with the enemies of the rite and with its lovers, with Old Believers and non-believers, idolaters and ideolaters, as well as in the rise of general morality. This external expression of religious impulses is completely in line with the manifestations of popular activity, both in the pomochi and toloki caused by climatic conditions, and during troubles and invasions; In 1612 Russia was saved, one might say, by common help, or toloka, as has already been said. It would be desirable for these private, local, temporary and rare upsurges to turn into a continuous, constant, living cause, a common cause, even if only in the form of building everywhere temple-schools with museums attached to them, i.e. with temples of ancestors; and in this case it should be laid as a foundation, accepted as an axiom, that schools should be everywhere where there are those being born, and museums everywhere where there are those dying. Even such a common cause would already be a cure for individualistic mental illnesses in the form of revivals. But the construction of such temple-schools, the construction of ordinary churches, is only the beginning, is the most insignificant expression of the common cause, for the common cause will find its full expression only in the implementation of what is desired, as it is said in the first verse of the eleventh chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews according to the Synodal translation; in the realization of what is desired (I hope for the resurrection of the dead) lies all religion, all good; a museum at a temple is only a canopy, a likeness, and not the desired thing itself, not the realization of what is desired. Thus, in resolving the question of ordinary temples, whether there was anything similar to them in the Near and Far West, in the Near and Far East, we must seek an analogy not only in external expression, but in internal, spiritual movements, which in our country are manifested by the construction of ordinary temples, and in other places can be expressed in something else, as revivals in the West ... With such a formulation of the question, the task does not expand only in volume and content, but also receives not only a theoretical meaning, the task receives, at the same time, a practical, conciliatory, unifying meaning ... In a comparative study of the manifestations of a common religious feeling, expressed in religious upsurges, such a study cannot remain fruitless. If the essence of Orthodoxy is expressed in the construction of ordinary churches, and the essence of Protestantism in revivals, then the leaders of the revivals, who arouse personal repentance with their speeches, could find a means of counteracting discord in proposing a cause that would unite those aroused and awakened by them. The construction of temple-museums, temple-schools, requiring for its implementation a variety of professions, represents the best cause, the best means for uniting the disunited, especially among Protestants with their extremes - the denial of icons and in general everything external, the denial of ate as the realization of faith. Of course, the museum's appearance, even if the museum were all-artistic, cannot yet be considered as the realization of what was desired, as was said above, but the museum will not be just an Old Testament canopy if it contains not only an incentive, but also a means for the realization of what was desired, i.e. if the museum is not only all-artistic, but also all-scientific, and moreover with the apparatus of Karazin or something similar to this apparatus, which is already the beginning of the conversion of blind force into one controlled by reason, deadly into life-giving; without such an application, natural science is aimless and has no meaning.
____________________
*
We express our deep gratitude to the persons named below, who provided the information on the basis of which this article was compiled: M. Azanchevsky, V.V. Vereshchagin (famous artist); St. S.E. Zverev (from Voronezh), St. I. Lavrov (from the Nizhny Novgorod province), St. Rebrin (Perm province), St. T.E. Chulkov (Vologda province), Strakhov (from Tver), St. T.P. Tarbeev (from the Kaluga province), F.A. Mikhailov (district chief of the Merv district); K.P. Afonin.
**
The symbol is closely connected with decadence, if it does not go into action.
***
By the way, there is also a help among the Turkmens of the Merv oasis: “Rich people who have large crops, if they do not have time to cope with the harvest due to a lack of workers, call on all those who want to help and arrange a treat for them in the morning and afternoon, for which the helpers work in their field. The work usually continues no longer than 2 o'clock in the afternoon. The same pomochi are arranged for harvesting the crops of the ishans by their admirers, the crops of widows and young orphans by relatives and acquaintances. In this latter case, help is considered a sacrifice to God, a godly deed, and refreshments are not necessary" (From a letter from the district chief of the Merv district F.A. Mikhailov.). Poaderbezhanski pomochi "er(h)ma".
****
This is repeated once in Russia very often, mainly during the so-called harvest, very often and everywhere.
*****
The stove is the most sacred place; the words peshcha and ognishcha.
******
This method of construction is very similar to a legend, and such legends exist not only in Russian lands; this is a legend about the power of a collective force, and this legend becomes criticism, destroying the myth that attributes the actions of many persons to one person, a hero, a genius. *******
"Having left the prince, he (the metropolitan) gathered his cathedral priests and all the clergy and ordered them to go with the crosses to Vyshgorod. And they came to the place where the saints (Boris and Gleb) lay, and the great prince Yaroslav was with them, and they erected a small cell (a small chapel or temple, which was erected in one day) on the spot where the burnt church had stood. The archbishop (i.e. the metropolitan), having come with the crosses, performed an all-night vigil in that cell. The next day the archbishop came with crosses (to the place) where the most honorable bodies lay... And having brought (the coffins) into the temple that had been erected on the site of the burnt church, they placed them on top of the ground, on the right side" (From the story of Jacob the monk, "Readings in the Society of Russian History and Antiquities", 1870, book 1). Golubinsky. History of the canonization of saints in the Russian Church ("Bogoslovsky Vestnik", 1894, July, pp. 67 and 68) 21.
********
There are two definitions of mortality, one philosophical, and the other religious, or Christian; the Christian definition has in mind the death of not only oneself, but also of all others, while the philosophical definition knows only one's own death; from this last point of view it is possible to prove that there is no death (ignoring gradual dying, weakening, aging), since, according to the expression of Epicurus, "while I am alive, there is no death, and when I am dead, then I am not." In exactly the same way, Tolstoy, following the fundamental philosophical commandment "know thyself", i.e. know only yourself, denies the existence of death, since he himself is still alive, and does not notice the death of others; in vain did influenza, and then cholera, prove the existence of death to him, for a person who knows only himself, all these proofs remained powerless.
*********
The establishment of a religious procession to the water on August 1 is explained by the need for rain at this time for sowing, and on one day and for one day only, a chapel was erected on the water. Walking to the water on the days of Mid-Pentecost and Epiphany have a basis in Scripture, while the prayer service on the water on August 1, it seems, has no such basis. Perhaps the Mid-Pentecost also had something to do with the spring rains, so necessary for the harvest; and did not the Epiphany procession and prayer have a connection with snowless winters?!.. 31
**********
The forest row between two Ilyinsky lanes. In the Church of Ilya the Ordinary there is an icon by the famous Simon Ushakov, the royal icon painter of the 17th century.
***********
India (or the Indo-European Peninsula), Indochina and China itself are the opposite of the Western European, or Alpine, Peninsula and can be called the Himalayan, or more precisely the Yunnan or Southeast Asian Peninsula.
************
In reality, Christ erected the temple of his body not in three, but in one day; for the corporeal temple, destroyed at the end of the fifth, He erected when the sun had not yet risen, no longer a week's day, but a work of resurrection. The temple is not a real resurrection, and therefore the temple-fighters, iconoclasts, word-fighters like Carlyle, fighters against consciousness, feeling, will like the Buddhists, must be shown the erection of corporeal temples, i.e., the resurrection.
*************
We erect monuments to the prophets whom our fathers killed 37.
**************
Only in our time did they think of equipping the Cologne Cathedral with a large bell, but this bell, thanks to the method of ringing that exists in the West, by swinging not only the tongue, but the entire bell, turned out to be silent.
***************
Western churches generally serve as an expression of silent prayer, because by the very method of ringing they cannot have large bells. Rome, however, surpasses the silent West in its muteness, as is evident from the following passage in Zola's Rome: "Memories from his pious and sentimental childhood made Pierre (the author of the New Rome) indignant at the Roman basilicas for the lack of bells, which are so popular with the humble believers of the masses. Bells require bell towers, but in Rome the churches have only turrets and domes, and no real bell towers. For this reason alone Rome cannot be considered a true Christian city with peals and bells, in which prayers rise to heaven in sonorous waves and where jackdaws (but not doves) and swallows constantly soar above the high bell towers" 38.
****************
And with a very strong desire, since the eleven-day period, not to mention the cold, due to the shortness of the days only at this time, must be converted into three days; and to build a temple in three days is no small feat, judging, at least, by the brief information we have. Only in the tale of Akira the Wise, I recall, is the temple built in three days.
*****************
“In the excellent wall painting of the present stone temple,” says M. Tolstoy in an article published in “Soul-Beneficial Reading,” 1889, No. 11, “the images recalling the history of the temple are especially remarkable; one of them depicts the destructive effects of the plague: a multitude of sick and dead people lying in the streets of the city and carried out of the city for burial; on the other, the beginning of the construction of an ordinary church at night, with the general participation of citizens; on the 3rd, the end of the plague, depicted in the joy of the kneeling residents of Vologda, looking at the newly created and newly consecrated votive temple" 64.
Comments

1 Published from: "Philosophy of the Common Cause. Articles, Thoughts and Letters of Nikolai Fedorovich Fyodorov". T. I. Verny, 1906, pp. 685-731. In the development of the issue of ordinary churches, the article was the final one. It summarized the extensive material collected by Fyodorov and people from his circle: chronicle sources, archival documents, information gleaned from historical and local history publications or sent in response to the appeal "On the delivery of information concerning ordinary churches and the life of St. Sergius of Radonezh." In a revised form, it included previously written articles: “On ordinary churches in general and Spasoobydensky in particular”, “On fraternal pomochi and toloki…”, with minor corrections the article “Ordinary churches and revivals”, as well as notes and letters about the Mordov-Kachimsky school.

On November 19, 1897, Fedorov informed Peterson about V.S. Solovyov’s intention to assist in the publication of one of his articles. “I think,” he wrote to his student, “that it would be possible to prepare an article about the Fin du Siècle Exhibition for publication, as well as an article that I left for additions: “On ordinary churches in general and Spasoobydensky in particular.” The latter article became the main core and starting point of work on the article “On the significance of ordinary churches”.

Although the project to publish the article "On Everyday Temples..." through Solovyov soon fell through (see Fedorov's letter to Peterson dated January 3, 1898), the work of supplementing and rewriting it was nevertheless continued. Fedorov and Peterson worked on this during the first three months of 1898: Nikolai Pavlovich rewrote the prepared materials in Voronezh, Nikolai Fedorovitch made corrections in Moscow. Upon Fedorov's arrival in Voronezh at the end of March, other topics came to the fore: stone babes as an expression of the cult of ancestors, the question of the purpose of museums, the idea of ​​creating the All-Scientific Constantinople Museum, etc. Attention was also absorbed by local topics (articles "Stone Babe of the Voronezh Museum", "Jubilee Exhibition", "The L.G. Solovyov Museum in Voronezh"). Then, from the moment of the publication of the circular of August 12 (24), 1898 on disarmament, the main theme of Fedorov's thought and activity for almost ten months became "pacification". And he returned to the article on ordinary churches only in the summer of 1899.

The impetus for this was the interest of V.A. Kozhevnikov, who at that time became a member of the Alexander III Society for the Dissemination of Education, in Fedorov's educational and upbringing ideas, in particular in his project for the widespread establishment of school-churches. In three April letters from Voronezh (April 11, 15 and 20), Nikolai Fedorovich warmly responds to his friend's intention to assist this project, sends him his note on the Mordov-Kachim school, and provides the necessary explanations. In June-early July, V.A. Kozhevnikov makes a trip to the cities of Northern Russia, and upon returning, visits Fedorova in Voronezh. The impressions from the journey "to the land of ordinary churches", conversations with Fedorov, his subsequent letters to his student ("After a not entirely successful attempt to collect information about ordinary churches through the Diocesan Gazette and Archival Commissions, a direct researcher was unexpectedly revealed in you at the very places of unanimous unification in the work of building entire churches, which prefigured the future unification of the living for the resurrection of the dead" - letter dated July 29, 1899) motivate Vladimir Alexandrovich to study this custom, and more broadly - other manifestations of popular consent in the history of Ancient Rus. He conceived of writing a large essay "Northern Russian Thoughts and Impressions", as well as a separate article on ordinary churches. Fedorov promised Kozhevnikov help and assistance in this undertaking and, leaving for Ashgabat, gave him a copy of his article on ordinary churches so that Vladimir Alexandrovich could draw the necessary material from there.

In September 1899, Fedorov sent Kozhevnikov additions to this copy: a preamble, a continuation and the text of two letters, which he also included in the article, but were missing from the version that Kozhevnikov had (see about this: Fedorov's letters to Kozhevnikov from September 8 and 15, 1899). To Vladimir Alexandrovich's question whether he could include some fragments of Fedorov's article in his own, there was complete agreement: "The more of these excerpts you make, the better. If this entire article were included in your work, it would be very good, and, of course, in verbatim expressions, if these expressions are precise, and in modified ones, if they are not very precise and clear in the article about ordinary churches" (letter dated September 15, 1899). Throughout the autumn and early winter, Fedorov regularly sends letters to Kozhevnikov from Ashkhabad with new information, instructions, again and again explains the meaning of the ancient Russian custom, speaks of the need to link the issue of ordinary churches with the issue of the religiousization of education. He asks S.A. Belokurov to pass on the materials he had to Vladimir Alexandrovich (see letter to Kozhevnikov dated November 10, 1899).

Kozhevnikov's essay "Northern Russian Thoughts and Impressions" was published in issues 10-12 of the magazine "Russian Herald" in 1899. Many of Fedorov's turns of phrase were woven into the plastic, artistically flexible fabric of the essay, and a number of the thinker's most important ideas were developed on the rich factual material: on the evolution of Russian church architecture from St. Sophia through the Assumption to Trinity churches and the meaning of this evolution, on the significance of the Trinity churches, which embody the covenant of "inner, universal unity, in a common brotherly feeling" and "in a universal cause", on St. Sergius, "a great venerator of the Holy Trinity". Kozhevnikov also touched on the theory of the criminal crowd, contrasting it, following Fedorov, with those examples of holy plurality that Russian history has recorded. The entire third part of the essay was devoted to pomochi, toloki, and manifestations of secular harmony in public and state life. Its text included that part of Fedorov's article on ordinary churches, which dealt with pomochi and toloki, as well as with the unification and salvation of Rus' in the Time of Troubles. Many pieces of the text were given without changes, others were expanded and supplemented. Kozhevnikov introduced a large number of new chronicle data, as well as book sources. In concluding his review, he pointed out that “the ability of the Russian people to voluntarily unite in unanimous, selfless, and socially useful work” “found a particularly pure moral expression in the unique, ancient Russian custom of building ordinary churches” (Russky Vestnik, 1899, No. 12, pp. 555-556) and announced his intention to devote a special article to this.

The article “Ordinary Churches in Ancient Rus” appeared in the very next issue of the “Russky Vestnik” (1899, No. 1). It also contained entire inserts of the text of Fedorov’s article, from the part that began with the words “Cases that are usually considered the beginning of the construction of ordinary churches...” and ended with a fragment dedicated to the Mordov-Kachim school. Vladimir Aleksandrovich gave the factual material of Fedorov's article to a large extent verbatim, and rewrote the meaningful pieces in his own vocabulary and style. As in the article "Northern Russian Thoughts and Impressions", Kozhevnikov cited detailed stories from the chronicles, included new facts, and made a number of interesting comparisons (descriptions of epidemics in Russian chronicle collections and in Italian chronicles).

In a note to the article "Everyday Temples in Ancient Rus", briefly outlining the history of collecting information about them in the 1890s, Kozhevnikov listed those who participated in this good deed. Fedorov's name was not mentioned here, although Vladimir Aleksandrovich was going to express special thanks to him. Nikolai Fyodorovich resolutely opposed this. In a letter dated November 19, 1899, sending a list of people who had provided information about ordinary churches, indicating who should be thanked, he insistently asked not to include him in this list: "Your desire to express gratitude to me frightened me very much, and I most earnestly ask you not to cause me such an unpleasantness." He did not recognize ownership of ideas, especially those that, in his deep conviction, should be born in the heart of every "son of man." Having received a copy of Kozhevnikov's article, Nikolai Fyodorovich responded to it, albeit with praise, but very briefly: "Having received your letter of January 9, I began to wait for the copy. [...] Now the copies have been received. But no matter how beautifully the article about ordinary churches is written, I would still prefer to read your poem "On the Rampart" (letter dated February 4, 1900). Probably, the article still somewhat disappointed Fedorov. Its historical part was rich in material, set out his thoughts about ordinary churches as monuments of unanimity and agreement, pointed out their pacifying and educational significance, but spoke in the most general terms about the purpose of pacification, about why the fraternal, loving, conciliar unity manifested in ordinary church building is necessary. Fedorov's views on the tasks of education, his ideas about what schools-churches should be, for what main purpose they should be built, were also given "on the quiet". But it was precisely the actively Christian purpose of the schools-temples, their role in turning the hearts of sons to their fathers, their active participation in the “work of salvation” that, in the opinion of the thinker, should be emphasized, and he repeatedly drew Kozhevnikov’s attention to this in his letters.

During Fedorov’s lifetime, his own article on ordinary churches, which eventually received the title “On the Significance of Ordinary Churches in General and in Our Time (the Time of the Convocation of the Peace Conference) in Particular,” was never published. Together with the thinker’s other most important and voluminous works, it was included in Volume I of “The Philosophy of the Common Cause” after his death.

When commenting on the text of the article, we translated the chronicle and other quotations cited by Fedorov only in cases where understanding their meaning seemed difficult. — 5.

2 The first special article on ordinary churches in Russian historical science. Fedorov repeatedly refers to it. — 5.

3 “The 10th Archaeological Congress in Riga, from 1st to 20th August 1896. Composition of the Preliminary Committee, Rules of the Congress, and Questions and Requests Addressed to the Congress.” Moscow, 1896, pp. 34-35. — 5.

4 On the Hague Disarmament Conference, Fedorov’s attitude towards it, his ideas about what a true Peace Conference should be, see the preamble to the “Articles on Disarmament and Pacification” — Vol. II of this edition, pp. 476-477. — 5.

5 Fedorov’s own article. See Vol. II of this edition, pp. 267-276. — 5.

6 See the preamble to the “Articles on Disarmament and Pacification.” — Vol. II of this edition, p. 476.— 7.

7 Fedorov refers to the article by A. Papkov “The Old Russian Parish. A Brief Essay on Church-Parish Life in Eastern Russia before the 18th Century and in Western Russia before the 17th Century”, published in the journal he mentioned on pp. 251-284. Describing the everyday and spiritual way of life of parish communities, the author specifically touched on the development of broad charity and assistance in them, expressed in the arrangement of hospices, almshouses for the poor, the needy, widows, hospitals (usually all of them were located at churches), as well as the so-called “poor houses” (or “God’s houses”, “squalor houses”), “i.e. "i.e. special cemeteries for the poor, wanderers, who ended their lives by violent deaths," etc. "On certain days, religious processions were sent to these poor houses from nearby churches and monasteries, and pious people flocked with coffins, clothes, and shrouds for the dead, and out of zeal, they themselves dug holes, tidied up the bodies, dressed them in white shirts and shrouds, then placed them in coffins and buried them in the ground, and by order of the highest spiritual authorities, a general memorial service was held for these poor people. The royal family also took part in this charity, so every year during Trinity week, shrouds sewn in the palace were given out for the burial of the dead in the poor house" ("Theological Herald", 1897, p. 273). — 8.

8 All of the following up to the words “In some places, the pomochi and toloki have become so distorted...” was originally part of the article “On fraternal pomochi and toloki” (printed in this edition with the exception of repeated passages). — 9.

9 Fedorov again refers to the article by A. Papkov (see note 7), which, in terms of the material presented in it and its focus, could not but be close to him. A. Papkov emphasized the original communal nature of ancient Russian life, which manifested itself at all its levels. The inclination for collective activity, he claimed, was characteristic of the Russian people even in pagan times, expressed not only in “general festive joy” and feasts, but also in public donations, care for the sick and the elderly, which “was considered sacred among the Slavs debt". Under the influence of Christianity, the ancient Russian way of life was reborn, and the communal principles were not only preserved, but also received fertile ground for development. "The Temple of God as a house of common prayer attracted all social forces to itself, it created a "parish", i.e. such a morally inclined social unit, stronger than which there could not be in human society. Christian interests, having united the "parishioners" by religious ties, set the goal of each person's life, namely his striving for the "common good", even higher and stronger, and the Russian community members, united by a sense of earthly justice, united by a fraternal feeling and made them "brothers" or "brothers". The resulting "brotherhoods" (parish communities at churches, "organized on the principles of conscience for local religious and church purposes") developed, according to Papkov, a diverse social activity that was entirely imbued with the Christian spirit. Ordinary churches were built, monasteries were established, chapels were erected in new places, and then parish churches. These churches always had a cemetery (cemeteries, the author of the article emphasized, existed in ancient times "even at city churches"), and even the administrative division was based on "pogosts" - a church with a cemetery, as well as church and parish buildings, bore the name of a pogost, and this name was then transferred to the village. “The permanent place of public gatherings of the inhabitants of the pogost was […] the very area where the church of the pogost was located, where, according to the evidence of the census books, ‘meals’ (‘similar huts’) were usually arranged. […] These meals, — wrote A. Papkov, — were a place for the pogost residents to gather and make secular decisions not only on church matters, but also on civil matters.” In the Kholmogory and Ustyug regions, “warm meals were arranged in the western part of the churches. They were directly adjacent to the church and formed one building with it. […] In these meals […] the parishioners arranged storage feasts (‘drinking prayer beer’) on church holidays and commemoration of the deceased on parental days. Here, too, the “parish people” gathered (on Sundays) for meetings to discuss their zemstvo and secular affairs, and here, with the church warden at the head and together with the clergy, all church communal affairs were decided.” Here, too, secular elections were held, the sovereign’s decrees were read, etc. “These meals,” concluded A. Papkov, “in the old days, obviously, constituted the center of all rural and urban life in such comparatively large cities as Ustyug” (Theological Bulletin, 1897, No. 2, pp. 251–270). — 9.

10 Definition given by V.I. Dahl: V. Dahl. Explanatory Dictionary of the Living Great Russian Language. Vol. 3. St. Petersburg-Moscow, 1882, pp. 274.— 10..

11 See note. 63 to Part III of the “Notes”. — Vol. I of this edition, p. 482.— 10..

12 In the text of the article “On Brotherly Helping and Tolokas” it is added to this: “…but where two or three gather in the Name of the Lord, the Lord is in their midst.” — 10..

13 In the article “On Brotherly Helping and Toloki,” the end of this paragraph after the words “and did not expect, of course, any treat from her” is stated as follows: “Reading and rereading these few lines, one is surprised how, at the words of the widow, filled with the most sincere gratitude—“darlings, I have nothing to treat you with, do not blame me; may the Lord send you His mercy”—how, at these words, a plentiful meal, capable of feeding all the helpers, did not emerge from the earth, and at the words “the Kingdom of Heaven to your parents,” how the earth itself did not part, did not give up its dead, did not become the Kingdom of Heaven, and the rebellious parents did not take part in the common meal. Having uttered these sincere words, the widow fell at the feet of the helpers, offering gratitude for the visible help to people and the invisible help to God, just as a priest, after a prayer, having blessed the gifts, falls down on his face, foreseeing in the present secret transformation of bread and wine into living body and blood the future obvious revival... All this is unknown and incomprehensible to the modern man, citizen, lawyer, economist - these words do not make the slightest impression on him. The help usually given on a holiday, does it not prove that for our peasants a holiday is not rest, not a Sabbath, but work, labor, or that our peasants are truly Christians? " - 10..

14 E.I. Yakushkin. Customary Law. Materials for a Bibliography of Customary Law. Issue I. Yaroslavl, 1875, pp. 206, 218; Issue. 2. Yaroslavl, 1896, pp. 486-487. — 11..

15 In 1611, the Trinity Lavra of St. Sergius, which had previously (from September 1608 to January 1610) withstood a sixteen-month siege by the troops of False Dmitry II under the command of the governors Sapieha and Lisovsky, took the lead in agitating for a people's militia. Its rector, Archimandrite Dionysius, and cellarer Avraamy Palitsyn sent patriotic messages to the cities, calling for an uprising against the enemies for the faith and fatherland. These messages spurred the already begun unification movement of the cities, which soon led to the creation of a people's militia led by Minin and Pozharsky, to the liberation of Moscow in October 1612, and the expulsion of the Poles from the Kremlin. — 12..

16 «Acts collected in the libraries and archives of the Russian Empire by the Archaeographic Expedition of the Imperial Academy of Sciences". Vol. II, St. Petersburg, 1836. The "formula" mentioned by Fedorov is on pp. 199-201. Extensive quotations from the "formulas" and "charters" of cities from the time of the convocation of the militia, "these monuments of popular unanimity" that captured "the voluntary, friendly, fast, [...] selfless work of unification, consolidation of the people's forces for the salvation of the fatherland", were cited by V.A. Kozhevnikov in the article "Northern Russian Thoughts and Impressions" ("Russian Bulletin", 1899, No. 12, pp. 552, 550). — 12..

17 In the article “Northern Russian Thoughts and Impressions” V.A. Kozhevnikov gave many historical examples of such assistance, which was manifested, in particular, in the restoration of ancient Russian cities after natural disasters or foreign invasions, as well as in the construction and strengthening of new ones. Cities were rebuilt in a matter of weeks, thanks to the “unanimous labor” of the entire population. “That such labor,” concluded Kozhevnikov, “in its nature was already to some extent approaching the more perfect, completely voluntary labor of building ordinary churches, this can hardly be doubted, judging by some surviving descriptions. Here, for example, is a picture of the emergence of Sviyazhsk: “The governors came to Sviyaga and, leaving the ships, began to cut down the forest, where the city should be and, having cleared the mountain, sang a prayer and blessed the water, and went around the wall with crosses, and besieged the city and founded a church in the city in the name of the Nativity of the Most Holy Theotokos and the miracle worker Sergius. Great miracles happened! The city, which was brought from above, stood on half of that mountain, and the governors and boyar children with their people immediately made the other half, for it was a large place, and they completed the city in four weeks” (“Russian Chronicler”, 1892, Vol. IV, pp. 63-82). Is it conceivable to accomplish all this otherwise than willingly and amicably by the working people, otherwise than in a brotherly and prayerful mood, in the spirit of the covenant of St. Sergius, in whose name the temple was erected—the patron saint of the new city, which grew so quickly, as if from the ground, that its appearance seemed a miracle both to the builders themselves and to the hostile foreigners who hastened to ask for peace under the impression of this event” (Russky Vestnik, 1899, No. 12, pp. 545-546). — 13..

18 The broad public movement in support of the Slavs that unfolded in Russia during the liberation war of Serbia and Montenegro against Turkey (1876-1877), and then during the Russo-Turkish War (1877-1878), caused a wide flow of volunteers to the Montenegrin, Serbian, Bulgarian and Russian armies (there were about 3,300 soldiers from Russia in the Serbian army). In March 1878, an all-Russian collection of donations was organized to create a "people's voluntary fleet", and in April a Committee for its organization was created, headed by the heir to the throne, the future Emperor Alexander III. With the funds collected, three steamships were purchased in Germany in June 1878, which were named "Russia", "Moscow", and "Petersburg". They were equipped with guns, staffed with military crews, but already in August, in connection with the completion of the Berlin Congress, which eliminated the threat of war, they were disarmed and sent to the Black Sea to evacuate Russian troops from San Stefano to their homeland. Subsequently, the management of these and other ships of the voluntary fleet was entrusted to the Voluntary Fleet Society created for this purpose. — 13..

19 In the article “Everyday, One-Day Churches,” included in the “Materials for the Archaeological Dictionary,” A.S. Uvarov pointed to the construction of the church in Vasilevo in 966 as the first example of a “votive,” “and perhaps even everyday” church. (A brief description of the construction of this church according to Uvarov’s article was given by Fedorov in the preface to the “Tale of the Construction of the Everyday Church in Vologda” (see this volume).) As an indirect argument for the fact that the Church of the Transfiguration of the Lord erected by St. Vladimir was everyday, A.S. Uvarov cites the “Tale of Bygone Years”: according to him, Nestor uses the expression “erected the church,” and this “clearly indicates the construction of a wooden church, whereas for stone churches he always says: “created or laid the foundation.” (Antiquities. Works of the Moscow Archaeological Society. Vol. I. M., 1865-1867, p. 43 (3rd pagination).) If we accept this observation of A.S. Uvarov as correct, then the Church of the Holy Mother of God, which the Grand Duke Mstislav Vladimirovich (? -1036) vowed to build in 1022 during his duel with the Kasog prince Rededey, was made of stone (“and having come to Tmutarakan, he laid the foundation of the Church of the Holy Mother of God and built it”) (Complete Collection of Russian Chronicles. Vol. II, M., 1962, p. 134). — 14.

20 Fedorov refers to the description of an ordinary church of St. Basil in Vladimir-Volynsky, placed in the book: P.N. Batyushkov. Volyn. Historical destinies of the south-western region. SPb., 1888, pp. 76-77 (2nd pagination). On this church, see also: E.N.Dvernitsky. Monuments of Ancient Orthodoxy in Vladimir-Volynsky. Kiev, 1889, pp. 22-28. — 14..

21 The episode cited by Fedorov is taken from the life of the holy martyrs Boris and Gleb (“The Tale and Passion and Praise of the Holy Martyrs Boris and Gleb”, creation of "Yakov Monk") and dates back to 1020 or 1026. As the life narrates, the bodies of the princely brothers killed in 1015 were buried near the Church of St. Basil in Vyshgorod. After many signs that occurred at their graves ("at the place where they lay, sometimes a standing pillar of fire was visible, sometimes the singing of angels was heard"), as well as after a fire that incinerated the walls of the church (all the utensils and icons were left untouched), Grand Duke Yaroslav the Wise summoned Metropolitan John and it was decided to erect a new church. During the construction, the relics of the holy martyrs were removed from the ground and installed in the church for veneration. Fedorov gives a quote from the "Tale..." in the translation of E.E. Golubinsky. — 14.

22 The chronicle source could not be established. — 14..

23 Kirik and Julitta—the holy martyrs, son and mother, who suffered in 304 in Tarsus. The day of the construction of the ordinary church in Ugodichi, dedicated to their memory, subsequently coincided with the day of the death of St. Prince Vladimir, who died on July 15, 1015. — 15..

24 The text of the "Preface...", authored by Fedorov himself, see in this volume. — 15..

25Fedorov gives the above quotations from the following publications: "Novgorod Chronicle according to the synodal charate list. Published by the Archaeographic Commission". St. Petersburg, 1888 (the so-called Novgorod First Chronicle); "Novgorod Chronicles (the so-called Novgorod Second and Novgorod Third Chronicles). Published by the Archaeographic Commission." St. Petersburg, 1879. In the second quotation, Fedorov contaminates fragments of all three chronicles into a single text; in the third, fragments of the Novgorod Second and Novgorod Third Chronicles. — 16..

26 The first two quotations are given according to the publication: "Pskov Chronicle, published at the expense of the Society of Russian History and Antiquities at Moscow University, by M. Pogodin." Moscow, 1937.— 16.

27 The church was built in 1650. According to V.V. Vereshchagin, who visited it in 1894, although it was intact, it was "completely in disrepair." Divine services were held there only once a year. “Everything that could be dragged from the old, dilapidated church to the new stone one standing nearby was taken out; the iconostasis, the old chandelier and some other things remained, which, due to their simplicity, were deemed unworthy of decorating the new church” (V.V. Vereshchagin. On the Northern Dvina. Moscow, 1895, p. 27). — 17..

28 N.A. Polievktov. Information about the towns and settlements located in the Vologda province. // Works of the seventh archaeological congress in Yaroslavl 1887. Vol. III. Moscow, 1892, p. 9.— 17..

29 Information about the construction of ordinary churches in Veliky Ustyug is given with reference to the chronicles by V.A. Kozhevnikov in the article “Ordinary Temples in Ancient Rus” // Russkiy Vestnik, 1900, No. 1, pp. 202-203, 210. The Kungur Chronicle is one of the Siberian chronicles of the second half of the 17th century, narrating about the campaign of Ermak. Translation of the quotes given by Fedorov: “On May 9, a votive chapel in the name of St. Nicholas the Wonderworker was built on that Settlement”; “From ancient times, the all-seeing Christ, the builder of his house, with love for his children determined that with the development of Siberia, the Gospel would be preached to all ends of the universe” (“Brief Siberian Chronicle (Kungur)”. St. Petersburg, 1880, p. 2). — 17..

30 October 2, 1552, on the day of the capture of Kazan by the troops of Ivan the Terrible, by his order, the ordinary church of Cyprian and Justinia was erected in the Kazan Kremlin. On October 4, the construction of the Cathedral Church of the Annunciation began, which was founded by the tsar himself, and on October 6 the church was already consecrated. After the capture of Narva during the Livonian War (1558), by order of the tsar, an ordinary church was also erected in it. The ordinary church in Moscow on Old Vagankovo ​​was built in 1531 by Grand Duke Vasily Ivanovich in gratitude for the birth of his son, the future Tsar Ivan IV. — 17..

August 1, the day of the celebration of the origin of the honorable wood of the Life-giving Cross of the Lord, according to the charter of the Orthodox Church, the so-called minor blessing of the waters is prescribed at springs and reservoirs (the holiday was borrowed from Byzantium, where on this day the surviving part of the cross of Christ was carried out from the imperial palace to the Hagia Sophia, and the blessing of the water was performed). Going out onto the water to perform the minor blessing of the waters happens, though not in all churches, and on the day of Mid-Pentecost, which is celebrated between the days of Easter and the Descent of the Holy Spirit (the service of this day glorifies the teaching of Christ about living water, flowing into eternal life (John 7:37-39)). On January 19, the day of the Baptism of the Lord, the great blessing of the waters is performed (the procession to the rivers, lakes, springs is called the "procession to the Jordan"). — 18.

32 Data on the religious processions that took place in Moscow in the 17th-18th centuries from the Assumption Cathedral to the Ilyinsky churches on July 20 (August 2), as well as during periods of drought or heavy rain, Fedorov cites from the publication of P.M. Stroev “Exits of the sovereigns, tsars and grand princes Mikhail Fedorovich, Alexei Mikhailovich, Fedor Alekseevich, autocrats of all Russia.” Moscow, 1844. The index to this book contained information about five churches of Elijah in old Moscow: the Church of St. Prophet Elijah on Ilyinka (known since 1519, preserved BC) our time), on Vorontsovo Field (the Church of the Annunciation with the side-chapel of Elijah, stone - from 1514; preserved to this day), the Church of St. Elijah in Barashi (from 1476 - a separate church, from 1689 - a side-chapel at the Church of the Entry of the Most Holy Theotokos into the Temple; preserved to this day), the Church of Elijah the Prophet Everyday (see note 33) and the Church of St. Elijah on Tverskaya (known since the 17th century, demolished in the 19th century). According to P.S. Stroyev, processions with the cross were held to the first four churches, in which the sovereigns also took part: "On May 28, June 4 and 11 to Elijah on a regular basis to pray for rain, on July 13 to Ilyinka, on August 3 and 4 to Barashi and to Vorontsovo Pole to pray for a bucket." The procession on July 20, the day of St. Elijah, established in 1660, was especially solemn: the procession went to the Lobnoye Mesto, then to the church on Ilyinka, to Elijah in Barashi, and from there to Vorontsovo Pole. Information about the Ilyinsky churches in Novgorod and Pskov is also contained in Stroyev's index: "In the old days in Novgorod there were two churches of the holy prophet Elijah (colloquially, wet and dry): people went to one with crosses to pray for rain, to the other for a bucket. In Pskov, until 1764, there were two women's monasteries of St. Elijah, also wet and dry" (p. 31 (2nd pagination)). — 18.

33 The Church of Elijah the Prophet in Kiev is mentioned in the chronicle under the year 945. — 18.

34 Fedorov refers to the article by A. Pshenichnikov "The Church of St. The Prophet Elijah of the Ordinary, on Ostozhenka in Moscow, which contained a detailed history of the church (it was originally wooden and built in one day according to a vow; in 1702, a stone church was erected in its place (it has survived to the present day)), a story about its sights (the icon of the Savior Not Made by Hands, painted in 1674 by Simon Ushakov), information about the veneration of this church in Moscow and visits to it from the Assumption Cathedral. This article also provided information about the “quick houses”. — 18..

35 The article in “Science and Life” was written by Fedorov himself in collaboration with I.A. Borisov (see this volume). — 20..

36 John 2:19. — 21..

36 Luke 11:47. — 21..

38 E. Zola. Collected Works in 26 volumes. Vol. 18. Moscow, 1965, p. 456 (words in brackets belong to Fedorov). — 23..

39 Gregory (Nyssa). A Word on the Life of St. Gregory the Wonderworker // Works of St. Gregory of Nyssa. Part 8. .

Moscow, 1871, p. 159.— 23.

40 “The Tale...” described the behavior of the Vologda people during the plague, when the decision was made to build an ordinary church: “Both men and women fasted and flocked to the temples of God with their small children, begging the Lord God with many tears for their sins and for him to quench his righteous anger and have mercy on his people. Confessing their sins, they partook of the most pure Mysteries of Christ and, dispersing to their homes, generously distributed alms. Neither theft nor robbery, deceit, insults and any evil were seen or heard then, either in the city or in the villages; neither lies nor anger nor fury nor insults and any malice; but all were united by great love […]. No one thought about worldly things, for all saw death before their eyes. No one was engaged in buying, for the marketplace was closed, and if anything was sold, it was only what was necessary and then in small quantities." — 25.

41 According to some sources, the oldest of all known Moscow churches, the Church of the Transfiguration of the Lord, was cut down in the middle of the pine forest that covered the place where the Moscow Kremlin later arose, on the site of the hermit Bukola's hut; according to others, it was built in 1272 by Grand Duke Daniil of Moscow. In 1330, after the capital was moved from Vladimir to Moscow, a stone church was erected in its place, which served as the main church during the existence of the Spassky Monastery in the Kremlin (from 1319 to 1491). Before the construction of the Archangel Cathedral, the Church of the Savior on the Forest was the burial place of the grand dukes and duchesses. — 25.

42 See notes 171, 245.— 26.

43 Metr. Macarius—see note 52 to Part II of the “Notes.” —Vol. I of this edition, p. 475. Sylvester—a priest of the Moscow Annunciation Cathedral, a political and literary figure of the 16th century. In the 1540s he was summoned to Moscow by Metropolitan Macarius as a bookish and pious man, and from 1547 onwards he quickly gained influence over the young Ivan IV, directing his activities in the same spirit in which Macarius had done. After 1560 he fell into disgrace. Metropolitan Philip—see note 66 to the “Council.” —Vol. I of this edition, p. 500.— 26.

44 A report on the construction of an ordinary chapel was presented at a meeting of the Oryol Scientific Archival Commission on January 17, 1895, in response to a letter signed by S.A. Belokurov (see note 101) by commission member I.A. Bogdanov. At the same time, it was decided “to print this report in the “Proceedings of the Commission” and hand it over to the member of the Imperial Society of Russian History and Antiquities at Moscow University, Mr. Belokurov, who is collecting stories about the construction of ordinary churches” (“Proceedings of the Oryol Scientific Archival Commission. 1895”. Issue I. Oryol, 1895, pp. 2-3). “The report of commission member I.A. Bogdanov on the construction of a one-day chapel in the city of Oryol” was published a year later: “Proceedings of the Oryol Scientific Archival Commission. 1896". Issue I. O rel, 1896, pp. 69-72. According to the author, the information he provided was contained in the book by G. M. Pyasetsky, “Historical Essays on the City of Orel” (Orel, 1874, pp. 215-216). It was from this book that I. A. Bogdanov cited an extensive quotation, which is reproduced here in full by Fedorov. — 27..

45 The article “A Good Initiative” (“Russkoye Slovo”, March 5, 1895, No. 62) belonged to Fedorov himself. The text of this article, as well as Fedorov’s response to the Bryansk Herald, which compiled the text of this paragraph in an expanded and revised form, see in this volume. — 29..

46 This is about Kozma Petrovich Afonin (1867-1918?), a Voronezh acquaintance of Fedorov, an employee of the railway department. It was he who told Nikolai Fedorov the above information about the construction of a church in the village of Kashirskoye. — 30..

47 About school-churches, see the preamble to this section. The opening of the relics of St. Sergius of Radonezh took place on July 5, 1422. — 31..

48 “Readings in the Imperial Society of Russian History and Antiquities”. 1893, v. 3 (vol. 166), p. 13.— 31..

49 Fedorov is referring to the “Speech at the consecration of the Church of the Appearance of the Mother of God to St. Sergius, built over the relics of St. Micah in the Holy Trinity Lavra of St. Sergius,” delivered by Metropolitan Philaret (Drozdov) on September 27, 1842. This speech contained the following lines: “Who will show me the small wooden church on which the name of the Holy Trinity was pronounced here for the first time? I would enter it for the all-night vigil, when a burning torch with crackling and smoke illuminates the reading and singing, but the hearts of those praying burn more quietly and clearly than a candle, and their flame reaches to heaven, and their Angels ascend and descend in the flame of their spiritual sacrifice” (Works of Philaret, Metropolitan of Moscow and Kolomna. Words and Speeches. Vol. IV. Moscow, 1882, pp. 193-194). The beginning of this excerpt was given as an epigraph to the above-mentioned article by S.S. Slutsky in Moskovskie Vedomosti by Fedorov. — 31..

50 Text of the cut made by the editors of Moskovskie Vedomosti in the article “On the 500th Anniversary of St. Sergius. The Holy Trinity Church at the Rumyantsev Museum was sent to Fedorov by its author, S.S. Slutsky (see Fedorov's letter to S.S. Slutsky in Vol. IV of this edition). — 31..

51 The fire in the reading room of the Rumyantsev Museum occurred on August 11, 1896.— 32..

52 Quote from Fedorov's article "A Good Initiative" ("Russkoye Slovo", 1895, No. 62, March 5). — 35..

53 This refers to a note published in the newspaper "Russkoye Slovo" on October 29, 1895 (No. 293) in the section "Internal News" under the title "The Opinion of Bishop Dionysius on Church-Schools". Dionisy (in the world Dmitry Vasilyevich Khitrov. 1818-1896) - missionary bishop, student and associate of the enlightener of Siberia Innokenty (Veniaminov). He compiled the Yakut alphabet and grammar, translated all the books of the New Testament (except the Apocalypse) into Yakut, as well as a number of liturgical books. From 1883 he occupied the Ufa cathedra. - 35..

54 A note in "Russkoe Slovo", explaining why "there are many parish schools in the Ufa province", "but no church schools", cited data on the negative attitude of Bishop Dionisy to the new type of schools not directly, but referring to the correspondence of "Volzhsky Vestnik". The bishop's opinion itself was introduced not by a quotation, but by indirect speech, with the phrase "as they say": "The Bishop, as they say, finds it incompatible..." That is why Fedorov speaks of the opinion attributed by "Russkoe Slovo" to His Eminence Dionysius, leaving hope for the inaccuracy of this information. — 35..

55 Fedorov is referring to the "Speech at the consecration of the Church of the Most Holy Theotokos, Seeker of the Lost, built at the castle of transit prisoners," delivered by Metropolitan Philaret on December 23, 1843 // Works of Philaret, Metropolitan of Moscow and Kolomna. Words and Speeches. Vol. IV. M., 1882, pp. 278-283. The reasoning cited by Fedorov is on pp. 278-279. — 35..

56 Fedorov bases his narrative and reflections on the Mordovsko-Kachimskaya school on the article “Construction and consecration of the new building of the church-parish school in the village of Mordovskoye Kachim, Gorodishchensky district”, published in the “Penza diocesan news” (part of the unofficial 1892, October 15, No. 20, pp. 854-860). The article was published without a signature, but belonged to the teacher of the Mordovsko-Kachimskaya school P.P. Mironositsky (see note 65 about him). The editorial preamble to it reported that the construction of the school was carried out within the framework of the program for the construction of buildings for church-parish schools of the Penza diocese, developed by the diocesan School Council. To raise funds for this enterprise, public works were opened, from which the local population received earnings. It was from this public works capital that 20,000 rubles were allocated for the construction of more than 40 buildings for parish schools and 3 church-schools (see also: “Construction of buildings for parish schools of the Penza diocese” // Penza diocesan news, 1893, February 1, No. 3). Mironositsky himself further specified that for the Mordovsko-Kachimskaya school, which opened on October 6, 1891 and was huddled “in a damp and cramped peasant hut” throughout the school year, about 350 rubles. The amount was small and could not cover all the expenses associated with the construction. However, peasants came to the aid of the teacher, who was the immediate supervisor of the work, and his father, the priest of the neighboring village of Russkoye Kachim, the main manager of the construction. "Almost all the fathers of the school students brought one, two, and some even three logs to the construction site, and one of them also donated 50 pieces of the best quality planks. The delivery of materials to the construction site was also carried out mostly free of charge by peasants - friends of the school. The best of these friends of the school, who laid down his soul for it, was the peasant Maxim Vasilyevich Merkuryev, who took upon himself the difficult and thankless task of going to those peasants who had agreed to help with the construction, reminding them of their promises, hurrying them, begging for new sacrifices, bargaining in peasant fashion with the suppliers, etc. […] The carpenters hired to build the school for 90 rubles also belonged to the number of friends of the school, headed by their contractor, the church watchman Maxim Belyanin. Finally, the students of the school themselves moved the common cause forward with their weak hands. It fell to their lot to lay, so to speak, the cornerstone of the school. One peasant donated 8 oak pillars left over from a burnt-down oil mill for the school. The sacrifice was a real find, but the trouble was that the pillars were buried deep in the ground and the carpenters refused to dig them up, afraid to spend a whole day on it. Then the teacher had the idea of ​​calling the schoolchildren together and sending them to dig up the pillars. Thirty people showed up with shovels, scrapers, and hoes, and a real ant work began on the site of the burnt-down oil mill, ending with the victorious and noisy extraction of oak logs from the ground. The next day, the schoolchildren went seven miles from the village to a moss swamp and there, under the supervision of an adult peasant, spent the whole day raking moss for the walls of the future school. The schoolchildren also had to collect wood chips suitable for fuel and remove unusable garbage. All this work was carried out with such unanimity and joy that it was necessary to hold up the children as an example to their fathers” (pp. 856-857).

However, not all the residents of Mordov Kachim supported the construction. Most of them, according to Mironositsky, were kulaks, bloodsuckers. They were indignant that they had not been asked, grumbled that the matter had been done without vodka. However, the unanimous impulse that had seized all the participants in the enterprise: the peasants—"friends of the school," the children, their fathers, the builders themselves—swept away all obstacles, and in September 1892 the building, founded in the summer, was completed. In terms of convenience and decoration, it cost much more than the money allocated (for a description of the building of the Mordovsko-Kachimskaya school, see "Penza Diocesan Gazette." Part unofficial. 1893, February 1, No. 3, pp. 116-117), and all thanks to the gratuitous assistance of the village residents. It should be said that other schools in the Penza diocese were also built with the active participation of the local population, which "helped with feasible donations and especially free labor and the supply of carts for the delivery of materials" ("Report on the activities of the Council of the Innokenty Educational Brotherhood [...] on the state of church schools for the 1892-93 academic year" // Penza diocesan news. Part unofficial, 1894, February 15, No. 4, p. 147)..

Based on the article by P. Mironositsky (we have retold only part of the text here, the article then described the ceremonial opening of the school), Fedorov also constructs his own interpretation of the Kachimsky event, which he calls "a new era in the history of education." In it, he found a manifestation of the same spirit that built ordinary churches in the old days, the beginnings of a new, "adult" morality. The story "about the construction of a school by children under the guidance of a priest and a teacher" is presented by the thinker in the genre of "tale". And this tale is placed by him not in that "natural" history, where there is a constant struggle, restrained only by legal frameworks, but in sacred history, opening the way to overcoming one's nature (all together, with a single selfless impulse, the Kachim people did one common thing). By the way, for the first time the story about the Kachim school, in the form in which it was later included in the article "On the Significance of Ordinary Churches", was set out in one of the letters to V.A. Kozhevnikov. And in this letter Fedorov asked the student "to depict in verse the thought, awkwardly expressed in prose", to create "praise to Mordov Kachim for the construction of a church school with unanimous labor." - 36..

57 "to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children" (Mal. 4:6). — 36..

58 See the quote in note 56. P. Mironositsky later used a similar comparison in his story about the construction of a two-class school building in the village of Russky Kachim, in which children-students also took part, as best they could: “It was a pleasure to watch this work. Our workers swarmed in the three rooms of the school just like ants. Each with his own burden, often beyond his strength. Another would get involved with a block of wood that was twice his size, puff and grunt, but would still achieve his goal—somehow push him out the door. Noise, hubbub, fun... Rivalry between classes, between the little ones ... "The boys with the "girls", the "nobles" with the Mordvins... How sweet it is to feel like the soul of this cheerful and innocent anthill!" (P. Mironositsky. From the diary of a teacher at a church parish school. Kyiv, 1895, p. 57). - 36..

59 This is about the article by Nikolai Aleksandrovich Zaozersky (1851-1919), writer, professor of church law at the Moscow Theological Academy, "Church Parish Schools" ("Theological Herald", 1893, No. 4, pp. 148-171). At the beginning of his article, Zaozersky cited Mironositsky's article in the Penza Diocesan News in its entirety, omitting, however, the names of all the participants in the construction and opening of the Mordovsko-Kachimskaya school mentioned in it, and giving the names of Belyanin and Merkuriev only by initials. Zaozersky wrote the following about the event itself: “Presenting a picture of this small in appearance, but very significant event in the life of the Russian church, we have reason to assert that many such small events have occurred and are occurring at the present time in Holy Rus'. The life of the church parish school is rich in bright manifestations of the rise of the national-church spirit, and together with manifestations of selfless feat - the most useful application of the moral and intellectual powers of thousands of chosen ones - church parish teachers and teachers. These people, for a meager reward, and sometimes completely free of charge, bring great benefit to the Russian people, forming and educating in the young generation of commoners, Russians and foreigners, a “new breed of people” (p. 152). — 37..

60 Everything that is said in the article “On the Significance of Everyday Churches...” about the Mordov-Kachim School was based on Fedorov’s notes and letters dating back to 1893-1894. It was during these years that the thinker conducted a particularly intense polemic with L. Tolstoy. In 1893 and 1894, V.A. Kozhevnikov’s brochure “Aimless Labor, “Inaction” or Action? An Analysis of the Views of Em. Zola, A. Dumas, and Counts L. N. Tolstoy to Work”, written under the direct influence of Fedorov (for more details, see note 40 to the articles on L. N. Tolstoy—Vol. II of this edition, p. 491). And in the summer of 1894, Fedorov wrote the work “In Defense of Deeds and Knowledge, Against the Author of Non-Thinking and Non-Doing, or Did the Famine of 1891 Teach Us Anything”, which he was going to publish as a separate brochure. In his letters of 1894 to Peterson and Kozhevnikov, the question of Tolstoy is constantly intertwined with reflections on the Kachim event, in which the philosopher sees the strongest argument against “non-doing”. The article by P.P. Mironositsky about the construction of a school in Mordovsky Kachim was mentioned in the list of works intended to refute Tolstoy, placed at the beginning of the work “In Defense of Deeds and Knowledge…” (under the title “‘Non-doing’ or a paternal and brotherly deed?” published in Vol. II of this edition). — 37..

61 An experience of such a “history” was given in the article by P.P. Mironositsky “An Essay on the Development of Literacy in the Village of Mordovsky Kachim, Gorodishchensky District” (“Penza Diocesan Gazette”. Part unofficial. 1892, Nos. 15-18). In the introduction to this essay, in a spirit close to Fedorov, he called for collecting information on the history of education in Russian villages and towns, pointed out the importance of such collection, wrote that "essays on the development of literacy among the people would be an excellent example of historical gratitude", "would bring to the pages of history many forgotten workers of public education". Mironositsky began the "history of education" in Mordovsky Kachim in the 40s of the 19th century, from where the legends about the first literate people came. It is noteworthy that among these literate people were Vasily and Adrian Merkuriev, whose father and uncle were "the main figures in the construction of a church in Mordovsky Kachim", and whose grandsons (primarily Maxim Vasilyevich Merkuriev) became "the main figures in the arrangement of a church parish school in the village of Mordovsky Kachim". Mironositsky reported on old maiden teachers, who were looked upon in the village as nuns in the world. These representatives of the "people's peasant intelligentsia" taught peasant children to read and write. Relationships in the old maiden school were similar to family relationships, "unanimity and love" connected the teachers with the students, and in their school "a certain type of village pious person was developed." The old maiden teachers, sisters Akulina and Anna Levin, also later helped open a church parish school in the village. Mironositsky's essay also spoke about the itinerant teachers and the first literacy school opened in 1865 by priest M. (his father, P.S. Mironositsky—see note 65—who served in this village at the time, where, incidentally, P.P. Mironositsky himself grew up), for which he himself "made tables and a blackboard", "bought textbooks and school supplies", about the library collected by the priest, about his efforts to convince the peasants of the need to open a parish school in the village and build it together ("a school is a public matter," he used to say). The essay concerned the second literacy school opened by priest K. (P.N. Krontovsky) in 1891 in the church gatehouse, and ended with a report on the establishment of the Mordovsko-Kachimskaya parish school in the fall of that year. Thus, with this essay P.P.Mi Ronositsky, as it were, rooted in the spiritual history of the village the event that he later reported on in issue 20 of the Penza Diocesan Gazette in 1892, and recorded the milestones of the path that finally led the villagers to the unanimous construction of a school. — 38..

62 Article by I.A. Borisov, written by him based on the thoughts of N.F. Fedorov (see the appendix to this volume). — 38..

63 Penza Diocesan Gazette. Part unofficial. 1892, October 15, No. 20, p. 860. — 38..

64 M. Tolstoy. The Savior-Ordinary Church and the Miraculous Icon of the Savior in Vologda // Soul-Beneficial Reading, 1889, Part III (No. 11), p. 357. On the stone Church of the Savior and the Commonwealth, erected on the site of the original wooden one, and on its frescoes, see notes 94.- 39..

65 The Mironositsky family, well-known and respected in the Penza diocese, had a direct relationship with the organization of parish schools in Mordovsky and Russky Kachim. His father, Pyotr Mironositsky, a priest in Russky Kachim, was the dean of the 3rd district of Gorodishchensky Uyezd and an observer of parish schools in his district (in 1892, there were 15 schools under his jurisdiction). His dedication and zeal in the matter of church-school education, to which he treated "not only attentively, but with love and inspiration," were repeatedly noted by the School Council of the Diocese (see "Penza Diocesan Gazette." Unofficial Part. 1891, No. 2, January 15, p. 71; 1893, No. 10, May 15, p. 419; 1894, No. 5, March 1, pp. 195-196). His two sons, Andrei Petrovich and Porfiry Petrovich Mironositsky, became public teachers. A.P. Mironositsky, who completed the full course of the theological seminary, opened a one-class church-parish school in Russky Kachim together with his father in the 1888 academic year. P.P. Mironositsky was a graduate of the Kazan Theological Academy (his master's thesis "Athenagoras, a Christian apologist of the 2nd century" was published in Kazan in 1894). Returning to the village, he — also with the support of his father — began organizing a school in Mordovsky Kachim, which was opened on October 6, 1891. Soon after their establishment, the Russo-Kachimskaya and Mordovsky-Kachimskaya schools (the first in two, the second in one academic year) became among the best in the diocese. In the "Report on the state of parish schools and literacy schools of the Penza diocese for the 1891-92 academic year" they were called "the most remarkable schools in educational and training respects." The level of teaching was high, and its methods were interesting. In addition to regular classes, A. Mironositsky organized extracurricular readings on Sundays and holidays, and in winter, sometimes on weekday evenings, where he told children “brief information from Russian history and geography” in “simple stories” (his students showed the greatest success in exams in these subjects). The school had a small library containing more than 200 copies of books for reading. P. Mironositsky’s students stood out for their success in reading and studying Church Slavonic. The special pride of the Mordovsko-Kachimskaya school was its choir. It consisted of 40 people and was the largest in the diocese. Mironositsky himself taught schoolchildren to sing (he was an expert in church singing; he later wrote a number of works on this topic: “Church Singing”, issues 1-5, 1904-1909; “Singing the Liturgy”. Pg., 1915; “Basic Teaching on Music”. St. Petersburg, 1912), as well as “the school trustee, peasant Maxim Merkuriev. Merkuriev gave singing lessons in the evenings, and often the students would show up at school unannounced and beg “Uncle Maxim” to take up singing.” In less than a year, a harmonious, well-coordinated choir had emerged, which could easily “sing the entire liturgy.” Moreover, “the choir acquired great fame in the area for the harmony of its singing,” so that neighboring landowners said: “You need to go to Kachim to fast, like to a monastery” (Penza Diocesan Gazette. Part unofficial. 1893, No. 9, May 1, pp. 376, 384; No. 10, May 15, pp. 411-413).

The level of discipline in schools was also high—and not at all because of the strictness of teachers or frequent coercion. The main thing was that A.P. and P.P. Mironositsky, as well as their father, who was a religious teacher at the Russo-Kachim School, earned the love and respect of both the children themselves and their parents. “Fathers were accustomed to looking at school as a place of education. And the students are very devoted and attached to the teacher, and in general there are the most lively and sincere relationships between them and the teacher. Therefore, the students spend most of the day at school: one can say that they go home only to eat and spend the night - the rest of the time they spend around the school and the teacher. Even former students of the school, who finished the course a year or two ago, do not break their connection with the school. They spend all their time at school,” - this is how the report characterized the Russko-Kachimskaya school (ibid., No. 10, May 15, pp. 411-412). In November 1892, the one-class Russko-Kachimskaya school was transformed into a two-class school. P.S. Mironositsky remained its religious teacher, and both sons now became teachers: Andrei in the first grade, and Porfiry in the second. This was the second two-class parochial school in the Penza diocese, and its structure was given was of great importance. The school was supposed to "train teachers for literacy schools" who, among other things, "could also direct singing choirs" (Penza Diocesan Gazette. Part unofficial. 1892, No. 23, December 1, p. 990)..

At first, the school did not have its own building, was located in three different places, and had almost no funds. But the father and sons worked truly ascetically. They did not shy away from any work. Even the furniture for the school was made by their own hands. Then money was allocated for construction. And again it was insufficient, and again the peasants came to the rescue: they brought almost all the timber with their help, and one of the help- especially urgent- was carried out even at night during the thaw. The children actively helped: they helped deliver logs, laid the first log during the foundation, filled in the internal rubble in the school building, cleaned up the trash, decorated the school for the opening, etc. (see "Construction of a new building for the Russko-Kachimskaya two-grade church-parish school" // Penza diocesan news. Part unofficial. 1893, No. 14, July 15, pp. 549-559, the article belonged to P.P. Mironositsky; P. Mironositsky. From the diary of a teacher of the church-parish school, pp. 33-60).

Even after the opening of the new building, the students did not cease to take an active part in the needs of the school. They were engaged in its arrangement, were responsible for the economic and educational part, for the proper preparation for classes. The school had a library—educational, student, and missionary literature—which was also managed by the children. They also laid the foundation for the school museum. P.P. and A.P. Mironositsky strove to develop the students’ independence and activity as much as possible. Second-grade students periodically taught classes in the literacy school, which was opened at the two-grade school, as well as in the preparatory class. Caring for the school, which became a common cause for teachers and students, united them into a friendly, harmonious whole, cemented by mutual trust and love. Just as in the Mordovsko-Kachimskaya and Russko-Kachimskaya one-grade schools, education here was closely connected with upbringing. And the children were brought up primarily by “a good example of personal life” and “reasonable words.” The spiritual atmosphere of the school was churchly: class prayer, lessons in church reading and singing, joint fasting of the teacher with the students, attendance at church services, serving and singing in the church. P.S. Mironositsky and his sons strove to “adapt the children’s home life to the heights of the school,” and they passed this aspiration on to the parents of their students (Penza Diocesan Gazette. Part unofficial. 1894, February 15, p. 150).

There was much in the history of the Mordov-Kachim and Russko-Kachim schools that resonated with Fedorov: the unanimous labor of their construction, in which the custom of gratuitous, “all-out” help was so important, the cordial, familial attitude of teachers to their charges (after all, Fedorov himself liked to repeat: “a good teacher lays down his life for children”), the aspiration not for external, formal order, but above all for internal discipline, for the coming of age of the heart, for the harmony of mind and soul. As V.A. Kozhevnikov wrote, according to Fedorov, “external discipline acquires value only when it becomes an aid to internal discipline, a means of developing that community of souls, that ‘psychocracy’, the creation of which constitutes the purpose of the school” (V.A. Kozhevnikov. Nikolai Fyodorovich Fedorov. Part I, Moscow, 1908, p. 30). The Kachim schools here met his aspirations. The example of the Mironositsky family was also dear to the thinker: the selfless, friendly work of the priest-father and his two sons grew into an alternative to the discord of generations that dominates “this century”, the conflict between fathers and children, the “rebellion of sons against fathers”. And the return to his native land of the "Master-Academician" who became a teacher of a public school became a symbol of the return of the urban intelligentsia, torn away from its roots and origins, to the village, to the ashes of their fathers, grandfathers, great-grandfathers.... There was another significant coincidence, one of those that Fedorov attributed to the action of God's providence, directing the living to the fulfillment of their destiny. Let us recall Fedorov's views on the task of the primary school, called upon to cultivate in the child a sense of kinship, love for deceased grandfathers and great-grandfathers. Let us recall that material-symbolic complex, which, according to the conviction of the thinker, should have organized around itself the life and activity of his ideal community: a school-temple, a museum, a Kremlin, an observatory. And, finally, a cemetery, which would be located in the very center, in the very heart of these institutions united into one whole. So, the Russko-Kachimskaya two-grade school, as well as the village parish church, were located on the very spot where the village cemetery once stood. And on the day of the laying of the foundation stone for the school building, “a litiya was served at the former cemetery for the repose of the servants of God ‘lying here.’ Inspiredly,” wrote P. Mironositsky, “we all sang ‘Rest with the Saints’ and ‘Eternal Memory.’ It was a very touching prayer. How long the servants of God lay here! Cattle walked peacefully on their graves. Even relatives lost the signs of their loved ones. gil. No one came here to commemorate even on the days dedicated to the deceased... And now life has begun in this dead place. We are moving to live with the dead and marked our first acquaintance with them with a prayer for them. May this prayer never run dry! " (P. Mironositsky. From the diary of a teacher at a church parish school, p. 45; see also his article on the construction of a two-grade school building: "Penza Diocesan Gazette". Part unofficial. 1893, No. 14, July 15, pp. 550-551).

One cannot help but cite another story, related to the third year of the school's existence and belonging to P. Mironositsky's brother Andrei Petrovich: "Today is "Radunitsa", the commemoration of the deceased. The days of general remembrance or "parents" have a special meaning for us. The school stands on "bones", on an old cemetery. True, this cemetery has long been forgotten and no one has been buried there for 60 years, but on "parents" a general memorial service is still held. The school, so to speak, owes its location to the deceased ancestors, and we consider it a sacred duty to proclaim "eternal memory" to them in prayers. Today, after the first lesson, all the students and we went out into the garden and waited for the priest to sing the memorial service. This memorial service left a very beautiful impression. Spring, blue sky, greenery breaking through, sonorous young voices, the touching “Rest with the Saints” and the joyful “Christ is Risen” – all this merged into one wonderful harmony, evoked in the soul hope, trust and love, love for the living and the dead” (P. and A. Mironositsky. Diary of a teacher of a parish school. St. Petersburg, 1899, p. 212). — 40..

66 This is about V.A. Kozhevnikov, who donated the proceeds from his brochure “Aimless Labor, “Inaction” or Action?” to the Mordovsko-Kachimskaya School. On Fedorov's instructions, Kozhevnikov wrote to the editors of the Penza Diocesan Gazette, as well as to Mordovsky Kachim (see the letter of N.P. Peterson and N.F. Fedorov to V.A. Kozhevnikov, July 25, 1894). In response to the latter letter, he received a message from P.S. Mironositsky. Fedorov, in turn, composed a reply letter to the priest of Russian Kachim (in a revised form, it was also used by him in the text), in which he briefly outlined the project for the widespread construction of schools-churches of the Holy Trinity; he also asked about the veneration of St. Sergius. He attached to the letter a brochure, "The Tale of the Construction of an Ordinary Church in Vologda..." - 40..

67 John 5:17. — 40..

68 “A speech on the 500th anniversary of the blessed death of our Venerable and God-bearing father Sergius, the miracle worker of Radonezh,” delivered by the rector of the Penza Seminary, Archpriest M. Znamensky (“Penza Diocesan Gazette.” Part of the unofficial 1892, No. 20, October 15, pp. 815–823); “On the significance of St. Sergius in the history of the Russian church and state” (Signature—“P”; ibid., pp. 523–830; ending—No. 21, October 30, pp. 897–907). The last article emphasized precisely those milestones in the activities of St. Sergius and the Lavra founded by him, which were close to Fedorov: the pacification of princely strife, the gathering of the Russian land in times of trouble, the establishment of a new order of succession to the throne, the Time of Troubles was discussed in particular detail. Fedorov considered the coincidence in one issue of the material on St. Sergius with the article on the Mordvin-Kachim school to be deeply significant—in his own notes and letters these two topics are intertwined more than once. — 40.

69 See note 15.— 41.

70 See in this volume the article “Two Anniversaries” and the note to it. — 41.

71 From this paragraph until the end of the article, the text is—with minor stylistic changes—the article “Everyday Temples and Revivals.” It was written by Fedorov in 1895 (see letter to N.P. Peterson dated October 1, 1895), completed in the summer of 1896 and supplemented in the spring of 1897; Fedorov intended to send it to the 10th Archaeological Congress (which was to take place in Riga from August 1 to 20, 1896) in order to once again draw attention to the inquiries sent there earlier by S. Belokurov and S. Slutsky about ordinary churches (see letter to V.A. Kozhevnikov dated August 7, 1896). The article was also sent to America to the Russian journalist V.N. Mak-Gakhan (for more details, see note 128). A separate typewritten copy of the text of the article “Everyday Churches and Revivals” is kept in the collection of N. F. Fedorov’s papers in the manuscript department of the Institute of Russian Literature (p. III, op. 2, no. 228). — 42.

72 This refers to Fedorov’s own article “Everyday Churches in Russia” (Russian Archives, 1894, no. 11, pp. 448–453). See it in this volume. — 42.

73 In his discussions of the religious situation in America and American revivals (see preamble), Fedorov, in particular, relies on data cited in the book by theologian Alexander Pavlovich Lopukhin (1852–1904) “The Overseas West in Religious and Moral Terms” (St. Petersburg, 1887). Describing the life of American Protestant communities, Lopukhin pointed out their fragmentation and isolation from each other, the caste, class nature of many parishes, and the fact that the parish itself is made up only of those who “bear the costs of maintaining” the church and the preacher—“either in the form of direct subscription fees or in the form of payment for sitting in the church, which in such a case is organized "is carried out entirely according to the system and plan of social clubs. As a result, the church inevitably loses its character of being accessible to all; the wealthiest people, who make the largest contributions and rent the most expensive seats, gain a predominant role in it. Competition and emulation, especially in churches where popular preachers are members, greatly increase the prices of seats, usually sold by auction (as, for example, in Beecher's church, where the price of seats sometimes reaches 1,000 dollars or more), a subscription to these seats becomes an object of a kind of fashion and fashionability, and thus the church is closed in a tight circle of more or less rich classes and becomes completely inaccessible to the poor classes of the population. And thus in America the church decisively loses the character of that truly Christian principle, according to which it should represent a complete brotherhood of all believers in Christ and according to which in it there is neither Jew nor Greek, neither slave nor free, and therefore neither rich nor poor, but all are one in Christ." This deprivation of the common people, especially the poor classes in large cities, of the “right to fraternal unity in the church,” wrote A.P. Lopukhin, “makes it all the more powerful and painful to feel that, according to the principle of the social and state life of the country, all citizens are equal in their rights and obligations, all are equal members of one democratic republic. And this theoretical equality is flagrantly violated precisely in the area of ​​the most sacred rights to the gospel of Christ!” (pp. 57-58). The reaction to this rejection was the departure of common people to free sects, such as the “Church of the Latter-day Saints” or the “Church of the Second Coming.” And only during periods of revivals, when not only religious differences but also economic, social, and class differences collapsed, did the poor have the opportunity “to take part in the general worship service without paying any entrance fee” (p. 68). — 42..

74 A.P. Lopukhin described the New York Revival of 1857 as follows: “… the religious enthusiasm of New Yorkers was aroused to such an extent that merchants, bankers with their clerks and other businessmen locked their offices and stores in the middle of the day, flocking in crowds to pray in churches”; “local theaters impromptu turned into halls for religious meetings,” where preachers called on those present to repent. “The religious movement in the States at that time was so intense and universal that it attracted the attention of the entire civilized world” (A.P. Lopukhin. The Transoceanic West in Religious and Moral Respect, p. 67). — 42..

75 The source of these three quotes could not be established. — 43..

76 “because they were privileged to see what their fathers did not see.” Quote from “The Tale of the Construction of an Ordinary Church in Vologda ‘for Deliverance from the Deadly Plague’” // Readings in the Imperial Society of History and Antiquities. 1893, v. 3 (vol. 166), pp. 16.— 43..

77 Ibid. — 43..

78 The main feature of revivals, wrote A.P. Lopukhin, is that they “go beyond the limits of religious forms,” overcome the barriers between sects, unite all believers “into one religious brotherhood, animated by the same feelings, the same thoughts,” and thus represent a “spontaneous protest” “against the church fragmentation operating in Protestantism,” “against that soulless, petty sectarianism that corrodes the religious and moral life of the people.” Moreover, according to Lopukhin, the revivals became in some sense a protest against Protestantism itself as a religion, since their participants in large numbers performed feats, fasted, organized public confession, etc. (A.P. Lopukhin. The Overseas West in Religious and Moral Relation, pp. 65, 68). — 43..

79 In the 1860s and 1870s, the American Episcopal Church, which had developed its own theory of the catholicity of the church in those years and dreamed of creating a “united church,” was in the process of rapprochement and dialogue with Orthodoxy. A special Greek-Russian committee was created, members of the Episcopal Church traveled around the Orthodox East, meeting with Orthodox hierarchs. And although this did not lead to reunification, the tendency to restore the catholic principle in the Episcopal Church continued later, manifesting itself both in the area of ​​theoretical theological thought and in the general consciousness of the Church, some of whose communities took vows of celibacy, obedience, poverty, introduced fasts, as well as in the movement to transform the liturgy (see about this: A.P. Lopukhin. Religion in America. St. Petersburg, 1882; his. The overseas West in religious and moral terms; his. Relations of the American Episcopal Church with the Orthodox East on the issue of unification of churches" ("Christian reading", 1881, 1882). - 43..

80 See note 128. - 43..

81 Fedorov relies on the note "The Church built in one day", which appeared in the newspaper "Moskovskie "Vedomosti" (1897, No. 90, April 1) in the "Life Abroad" section. "The American newspaper "Tagliche Illinois Nachrichten," wrote an anonymous correspondent, "reports that in the Chicago suburb of Ravenswood, recently in In one day a church was built and completely finished inside and out, capable of holding 3,000 people, heated by three fireplaces and lighted by electricity. The next day it was consecrated. The site on which the church stands was still an unbuilt vacant lot on Friday evening. When the people of Ravenswood rubbed their eyes and looked out of their windows on Sunday morning, they saw a new church, already completely finished, from 90 to 120 feet high, with smoke rising from its chimneys and open doors inviting the pious citizens to worship.

The contract for building the church was concluded late on Thursday evening. The first building material for the church was brought in on Friday at 3 p.m., and at the same time the electric wires were run to a factory two miles away. On Saturday morning, at 5 o'clock, ten men began to build, and as the materials arrived, the number of masons increased, so that at last about 200 were engaged in the work. By 5 o'clock on Saturday afternoon the walls were up, and the roof had advanced so far that the ladies of Ravenswood could decorate the inside of the walls with greenery and flags.

The 3,000 chairs were all in place before the roof was finished, and the pulpit and piano were in place at the same time as the church doors were being hung." The note went on to report on the subscription for the church, which had raised £1,700 in a week, and on the occasion of its construction (lectures by Pastor Williams). — 44..

82 Radstock Grenville Waldigrave (1831-1913) — English evangelical preacher. In 1874 he arrived in St. Petersburg and preached with great success in high society. The fascination with Redstock’s sermons among the Russian aristocracy was so strong that it was often regarded as an epidemic mental illness, similar to the mass psychoses of the Middle Ages (see Golos, 1876, April 27, No. 117). Redstock’s followers formed the Pashkovites sect, which received its name from the surname of one of its leaders, retired Guards Colonel V.A. Pashkov. The basis of the Pashkovites’ teaching was the Protestant position on justification by faith: being powerless to earn justification before God and find salvation by his own deeds, man is capable of salvation only by faith in Christ the Redeemer. Having repented and believed in Christ, he begins to do good deeds by the power of faith. — 44.