“FIN de Siècle”, <<*1 >> Unfortunately, did not end with the last day of the XIX century! That the fall continues is easy to notice, but that of the newly emerging will become a means of salvation, it is very difficult to guess.

The family falls, breaks up; Sons and daughters family life seems too narrow; They even thirst for public life, believing that the claims of a citizen are higher than the debt that sons and their daughters are obliged to fulfill; They believe that it is necessary to forget the fathers and mothers, to sacrifice them for science, art or public interests. It seems to them that the “man” and especially the “superman” is outside the family and that both ethics and religion require renunciation of kinship.

Is there a more misconception! The duty of sons and daughters is not only not narrow - it has no limits and boundaries; The whole universe serves him with a sweat.

The brotherhood of sons is not a denial of only any enmity; This is participation in the universal and for every native business, which brings everyone together and connects mutual cognition.

Soulless citizenship rests on mutual secrecy; External enmity, the open war, became an internal disease in him, hidden, but no longer in a coat, but chronic and all the more correctly killing.

In the "public", which does not exclude party malice, there is no in common, while in brotherhood there is a common one.

Only animated by love, the natural, related love of sons and daughters, science and art can become life -giving, turning the instruments of extermination to the instruments of returning life, and not creating objects of temptation, decorating their daughters and distracting sons from the fulfillment of duty to fathers. Inanimate love, science and art become abstract, soulless, or serve as a brutal and bestial instincts.

For a family forgetting fathers for the sake of children, the participation of a wife and children in an extra -making business, in science, art, industry can only destroy, and not improve family life. In working families, women's and children's work does not even improve material life, because it lowers earnings; At the same time, she destroys and destroys the family morally.

*1 end of the century (French).