According to Aristotle and contrary to Kant, space and time must be exalted to the categories of knowledge and action. By making space and time by the categories of the mind, we turn knowledge from the abstract into the specific, we are not limited to the disclosure of relations, laws, but we want to see them in external expression.

The space receives its true meaning when physics and chemistry merge with astronomy, and do not only remain a distraction of it, allocated into special sciences.

In the same way, time will receive its true meaning when the story is a combination of biographies in which the kinship of the people will be revealed.

Highlighting the doctrine of space and time in a special science of science, lower from the science of mind, legitimize the people from scientists existing in life. Although they recognize that the latest science cannot exist without the first, nevertheless, the end of knowledge give out distraction or logic: physics turns into cosmology, and not regulation, just as history and psychology do not turn into a resurrection, and theology itself remains only with the words about God, and not the work of God, not theirgias, remains ideal without reality.

But the biggest drawback of criticism is to recognize the ignorance of what all people know, namely: ignorance or, rather, ignoring mortality. “Criticism” does not notice that the general property of all categories of knowledge is mortality, and the general property of all categories of action is immortality (or the path to it). That is why the mind is not subjective and not objective, but projective; And in this projective ability the theoretical mind and practical are united.

Mortality is an abstract expression, a generalization of all dead, of all necrologues; Nevertheless, in mortality, one cannot assume categories of universality and necessity [to such an extent that recognition] of the category of immortality would be a violation of logic. Mortality, as a conclusion from previous cases, is a real phenomenon, but only conditionally actual, by no means necessary.