As conscious performers of the will of the divine mind; Turning born to the recreated, that is, in themselves already wearing the cause of their lives, people cannot be slaves of blind power. Their existence can no longer have, as followed by the 1st antinomy (Kant), the limit in space or in time. The ability to recreate is the possibility of consistent existence everywhere and simultaneous being with all generations always. All born creatures in their totality, controlling all the worlds of the Universe in its integrity, treating God as the Father and being his likeness as a creator, have no one who would put them limits “outside”.

The 2nd Antinomy raises the question of the limit of division, crushing or decomposition inside, that is, the question of whether or not to be a border for division and decomposition in the blind nature? This question, like all other, is insoluble for a passive, theoretical mind, when it becomes a matter of the practical mind of the sons of human, will turn the decomposition into recreation, addition and division will turn into a matter of life, not death. Everything, wearing a source of division, changing life in themselves (in their own will and in their mind), will become indecent, immortal. The sons and daughters who have become the culprits of the packing of their parents, not only will not only be ephemeral phenomena, that is, mortals - they will already be entities that are not only aware of themselves, that is, subjects, but also worn projects for the recreation of their parents, projects that they, resurrecting parents, turn into objects.

The question of the death of the world, the Universe, obviously depends on whether nature will reach, fulfilling the will of the creator, self -awareness and self -government, or will not reach? In the latter case, the fall, death will follow.

Separation from outside, external unconscious power produced, is decomposition and death. The reunification of the decomposed, consciously produced, is the resurrection. Changes consciously made by will and knowledge with the possibility of restoration are life and immortality.

*1 Spelling N.F. Fedorov (V. A. K.).