The question of a single, synthetic science, embracing the entire complex of human knowledge, has arisen more than once. Our time poses it only in a somewhat different, new, purely practical formulation. Individual branches of science have grown so much, have become so specialized, that their coverage by one mind has become completely impossible.

Impossible - but nevertheless absolutely necessary. For without it, science becomes provincial, loses its connection with life, its individual branches are locked into an extra-vital, purely museum existence. And our modern era is least suitable for the purely abstract flourishing of science. More than ever, science requires leadership, purely practical guidance in life, which is precisely what can in no way be expected from isolated branches of science, which have no windows into neighboring areas, almost completely torn away from each other and, in any case, alien to each other in interests and methods.

Life demands a new synthesis, a new system of sciences, to replace the anarchy of equal and unrelated sciences-individuals that reigned in the 19th century, demands a new scientific worldview, i.e. the unification of anarchically scattered disciplines, their inspiration by one common scientific ideology. <…>

The failed Marxist attempt to re-evaluate the role of science in modern society was at the same time an attempt to unify the branches of science that had spontaneously disintegrated over the last century and a half. It failed because, although it was undertaken with the right goal, it was undertaken with obviously false means. Its failure was inherent in it.

But this failure in no way discredited the direction correctly taken into account by Marxism, the correctly perceived demands of life: after all, if you have not succeeded in assembling a reaper from separate wheels, cogs, wings, knives, etc., this does not at all mean that it should not be assembled at all; and after all, here and there the material is the products of the inevitable differentiation of labor in our time. The problem remains a problem - correctly posed, but unresolved...

The worship of the ideal of abstract science, contemptuous of life, "science for science's sake" - is the same snobbery as the aesthetic theory of the end in itself of art. It is not without reason that modern times have posed the problem of the primacy of practice over theory. Kant's formulation of the question - from pure and practical reason - now reeks of deadness; in such an opposition nothing remains of the praxis of practical reason; this formulation of the question is hardly acceptable to anyone who approaches the problem sincerely. In the form of a reaction, life has even sharpened the antithesis of this thesis too much, has become too carried away by practice, action - to the detriment of theory, thinking. The future must provide a synthesis. All appeals from non-scientists to scientists of N. F. Fedorov - his entire teaching is an attempt at such a synthesis. Our time stands under the sign of including science in the general context of human life, under the sign of lowering the ridiculous puppet heights to which the snobbery of the decadent period has driven naked scientific thought. Let science guide life, rule it - but for this it is necessary that life first of all absorb science, set its own methodological tasks for it. The title of scientist has always been and will be an honorary title - why the purely theatrical stage of pseudo-revelation for the "uninitiated", when after all this is the most ordinary earthly title of representatives, albeit highly qualified, but still simple human labor. And what caused this pagan worship of one's own power, if not the antithetical production, most sharply realized in the practice of revolutions, when any other labor, except physical, is despised and trampled into the mud, when sometimes the right to life is proven by calluses on the hands.

The time has come for synthesis. Esthetics as a branch of human thought, which is in charge of the form-creating principle, i.e. the effective attitude to the world, acquires special significance. Esthetics has always been one of the main philosophical disciplines. The importance of this branch of science has been clearly underestimated in recent times due to the general attitude of European legal-formal thinking, reflected in the traditional distortion of the very concepts of both aesthetics and ethics. The emasculated thought of Western European legalism could not understand the entire primacy of the aesthetic principle in human life, since, with the light hand of legal dominance, every problem began to be posed only “formally,” and not materially. Hence the disregard for the two main branches of human thought that cannot be perceived only formally, more closely than others connected with the everyday moment of human life, and it is these that real ethics and aesthetics should be concerned with. The revival of aesthetics, which began in recent times, also affected this discipline in its entirety—it perceived it not only in that part of it that is usually called the theory or philosophy of art. And yet, how can one ignore the primacy of that branch of thought whose categories are such the most essential, integral principles of human worldview, such as rhythm and its derivatives, number and measure.

If in the decadence of the beginning of the century we experienced an aestheticizing era in ethics (as in everything else), then now, on the contrary, it seems, a period of ethical pathos is coming, which will undoubtedly give an ethical direction to aesthetics. Some kind of service to the highest guiding principles permeates, at least organizationally, the life of our modern society. The theory of the intrinsic purpose of human creativity is already perceived by us as a desire to simply brush off the question.

Since aesthetics is called upon to treat precisely about form and so<s> as> any human projection outward is primarily creativity, i.e. design, then art as the main result of creativity serves as the material for the main plot of aesthetics. Ontologically, ethics and aesthetics as sciences of will and representation (in the present and not the traditional philosophical sense) are disciplines with an extremely broad scope of material. They embrace a significant measure of being. But purely epistemologically, the theme of aesthetics is limited to the area of ​​human creativity, technically understood in a narrow sense, i.e. as a philosophy of art.
NOTES
Published from: Eurasia. 1929. No. 9. 19 Jan.