If the special history of philosophy assigns Jacobi only a secondary place, it is because philosophy itself does not occupy the first place in a truly universal, comprehensive history. And when Jacobi recognizes in Fichte the "Messiah of philosophy," that is, sees in him the completion of philosophy, then by this very fact he becomes in world history the forerunner of a new era, one in which school philosophy will no longer reign; and, in Jacobi's just opinion, there can be no other, real philosophy.

Germany thought with Kant and Fichte, and felt with Jacobi, that is, Germany rejected with its heart what it accepted with its mind. This contradiction between narrowly German, personal feeling, and not filial, universal human feeling, and reason constitutes the fatal question of our time.

But what Germany thought with its thinkers and felt with Jacobi, that same thing she painted on the walls of museums, temples, universities and palaces with Cornelius, Overbeck, Kaulbach, who himself called his apocalyptic compositions philosophical dissertations.<<1>>

Jacobi was to a sufficient degree a son of his century; and yet in him, as a thinker, one cannot see the expression of only the temporary, the ideas and aspirations of his century. To the ideas and passions of his time and to the temporary in general, he contrasts something eternal. He himself, it seems, was not fully aware of why he acted in this way and not otherwise; not for nothing did he admit the just reproach that “he is a philosopher only by nature or character, and a writer by chance,” and he saw the reason for this in the fact that “his head has grown together with his heart” so much that he is not able to live by abstract thinking alone.

Jacobi, some say, has a great resemblance to Lessing. This is quite true, as is the fact that the former did not have such success and did not enjoy such importance and influence as the latter. But this happened because they worked in an environment where the imaginary, that is, the interests of thought in itself and art for art's sake, were more valued than the interests of reality, understood not in a narrow practical sense.

There is another similarity between Lessing and Jacobi: both can be called fighters, and both fought, apparently, with the same means. But Lessing's hostility and hatred for his opponents was ten times stronger than Jacobi's. "I despise the orthodox," Lessing exclaimed, "but I despise the new-fangled rational deniers even more!" The fighter Lessing was ready to spiritually destroy his opponents, despite the fact that as the creator of "Nathan" he preached tolerance. The fighter Jacobi, who confessed his own duality when he said that he was half pagan, half Christian, would have liked to reconcile the contradictions he discovered in his struggle with contemporary philosophy between the mind and the heart, between pure reason and feeling. But he was unable to provide this reconciliation, and not because (as is usually thought) his philosophy was scientifically weak, but because its basis, feeling, in the form in which Jacobi accepted and praised it, is deprived of fruitful content to the same extent as his theoretical thinking and practical work were deprived of it in Kant. The whole of Western philosophy could not resolve the contradiction exposed by Jacobi, but not eliminated by him...

... Our all-Slavic philosophy consists in the fact that there should be no contradiction between the mind and the heart...

1 If we mentally connect the works of monumental painting of the mentioned artists and others like them, we will get an art museum that could become a philosophical auditorium, clearly explaining the abstract principles of the above-mentioned philosophers, and could become a hall for reading the works of the Kantian Schiller, the romantics-Fichteans and, finally, Goethe, who was a natural philosopher with Schelling, without going into his extremes, and was a philosopher of the spirit with Hegel without Hegelian extremes.