"Religion is not knowledge, but a way of life, through which man is placed in certain relations with God." "God should be defined in the sense of a magnitude not metaphysical, but ethical-practical," in other words, God is love. (According to the Old Testament, "God is defined in the sense of a wise and holy power, which sets for itself the goal of realizing in the world the veneration of this power and demanding unconditional obedience to it from people.") The great theologian of the new German Empire, who uttered these positions, was invited more than once to the new capital of the Empire and to the University of Strasbourg, annexed to the Empire, but he remained in Göttingen. This did not prevent him from becoming the master of all subsequent Protestant theology. "The mass of scholarly material that Ritschl had at his disposal, and the new point of view in distributing this material, had a stunning effect on the majority of German theologians." The strangest thing is that the most obscure of the new thinkers after Kant became the head of the theological rationalists. If, however, obscurity helps ambiguity and evasiveness where difficulties are felt from contradictions and from indecision to express oneself sincerely and definitely, then there is nothing surprising in the success of "Richl the Dark" in the shaken modern Protestantism. In 1870, the year of the Franco-Prussian or, more accurately, Franco-German war, the first volume of Ritschl's main work, "Die christliche Lehre von der Rechfertigung und VersЖhnung", was published, and Catholicism in that very year recognized the infallibility of the Pope. In 1874, the second and third volumes of the same work were published, rejecting everything mystical and metaphysical and recognizing only the practical-realistic, moral. Unfortunately, Ritschl identifies science with metaphysics; religion, according to his teaching, “emerged from the practical desire to eliminate the contradiction in which man as a spiritual personality finds himself in relation to the external world. The goal of all religious aspirations lies in the search for the highest spiritual power that would eliminate this contradiction.” According to Ritschl, “the Kingdom of God is the correlate of love, since it represents a society of Christ’s disciples united by love for the purpose of realizing spiritual and moral goals.” Ritschl’s entire system is thus a complete expression of narrow realism. “Everything in him is concentrated around three words: goal (Zweck), final goal (Endzweck), end in itself (Selbstzweck). Divine revelation, according to Ritschl, is only the proclamation (Kundmachung) of the Divine will.” According to Ritschl, “Christianity is a spiritual and moral religion that affirms the blessedness of man in the idea of ​​sonship with God (Gotteskindschaft) ​​1>> or in the idea of ​​the redemption of mankind by Jesus Christ, and creates a moral organization among people on the basis of love, in which, in turn, the idea of ​​​​the Kingdom of God is realized.” Christianity, according to Ritschl, “includes two elements: 1) the religious element itself: the blessedness of man, expressed in the latter’s dominion over the world, and 2) the ethical element, which normalizes human behavior.” Both of these elements are united in God. <<2>” Ritschl compares these two elements to an ellipse, “ending on the one hand with the religious idea of ​​​​sonship with God or redemption (dominion over nature), and on the other, with the moral idea of ​​​​the Kingdom of God.” The doctrine of the unification of all living for the resurrection of the dead is very similar to Richlianism in words, but is completely opposite to it in its understanding of reality... It seems certain that the difference between Richlian theology and Orthodox theology (or projective theology) is that the former, the German, turns deed into thought, while the latter, our Russian, requires the conversion of thought into deed, and science, converted into the property of all, becomes a means of converting thought into deed. By separating knowledge from deed, Richl completely separates the two minds. To seek the highest power that would eliminate the contradiction, does not it mean to turn God into one's instrument? "Divine revelation, according to Richl's definition, is only a manifestation of the Divine will, expressed in the establishment of the Kingdom of God on earth"; and "the Kingdom of God, according to Ritschl, is neither more nor less than the organization of humanity for the purpose of moral behavior from motives of love, which Ritschl reduces to the concept of will." Would it not be simpler, however, to say that the Kingdom of God is the unification of all living beings, all sons, all rational beings for the resurrection of the fathers?

1 Sonship with God must be understood as the elimination, the denial of alienation from God; and upon the recognition of sonship with God, the consciousness of brotherhood becomes obligatory in contrast to alienation from God, in which non-brotherhood is maintained. Brotherhood gives blessedness, i.e., the resurrection of the fathers, as a consequence of dominion over the world.

2 These two elements correspond to the unification for the conversion of nature from the kingdom of absorption to the kingdom of resurrection, or the unification for resurrection.