On the issue of real life, questions about the ancestors, that is, about the already dead, as well as questions about not yet dead are combined into one question about mortality.

To recognize their mortality means recognizing everyone with the general cause of their private, personal disasters; And only he can be called a reasonable being and a human son, who knows the actual, common with all the other sons of the human cause of suffering, and who is the conversion of a blind, deadly power in the life -freeness of the goal of his whole life and also with all the others.

Only education can make such reasonable creatures; And such an education has an undoubted right to be a binding right behind him, because only thanks to this education, mankind will become a kind that has a common task for all generations; Education is not a luxury, but a necessity. No matter how deep the causes of mortality are, mortality is not original; It does not represent an unconditional need. The blind power, depending on which a rational being is located, can itself be controlled by reason.

Christianity believes in the triumph over death; But this faith is dead, and therefore death exists; Vera will be dead while it remains allocated from all other human forces, that is, so far all the forces of all people are united in the general purpose of the resurrection. Not resurrection is impossible; It is impossible for the restlessness of death: it is impossible to separate the disasters, as a cause, from death; And such an impossible task was set by all reformers to socialists inclusive. Those who wanted to make a mortal happy, mixing happiness with wealth, did not know the real general cause of human disasters. To think about personal happiness, about happiness separately - this means thinking about perfection is unfulfilled, to indulge in an idle dream. Not a thought about personal, limited happiness began humanity even when it all consisted in another person. The vertical position was developed for comprehensive protection of offspring and ancestors. The creation of a person or his phenomenon was not random, but was a necessity for the earth, for the whole world, as a mind for nature is necessary, if only this mind is not absorbed in industry, if he, realizing in the natural science that nature itself goes to destruction or absolutely rest, that is, finds its task in this consciousness. The guard position was not only observant or contemplative. In this position, a person developed the organs of amateur performances and, without depriving himself of the organs of the support and movement, became the acting, a working being. A small change in the organ, which serves in animals for grabbing, had the greatest moral consequences. A person with these organs could not be content with ready, given what is, but the idea of ​​what should be, what should be, both the world and he himself had. Together with the organs of action and movement, the consciousness of the goal was.