(Sketches)

What Solovyov, having rejected "abstract principles", nevertheless designates by the abstract term "positive all-unity", should be called "concrete supra-moralism", reuniting the moral with the intellectual and aesthetic. This supra-moralism is the salvation of the worlds that are falling and disintegrating by the return of the dead generations to consciousness and to life by the combined forces of all living, and through this - the transition of nature itself to consciousness and self-government, in fulfillment of the will not of the absolute first principle or the All-One spirit, but of the Triune God, in Whom the boundless Love of the Son and the Spirit for the Father denies the very possibility of death.

Solovyov rejects the national, but does not deny class, and his philosophy is the product of a class doomed to inaction and condemned to thinking alone, while supra-moralism makes everyone knowledgeable. Philosophy, understood only as thinking, is the product of humanity still in its infancy, although philosophers are often portrayed as old men.

To prove the inconsistency of Western philosophy does not mean to prove the inconsistency of philosophy in general, that is, its belonging to immaturity. But philosophy, understood not as pure thinking alone, but as a project of action, is already a transition to adulthood.

Soloviev, in saying that philosophy in the form of rationalistic knowledge confirms the contemplation of religion, wants, of course, to say that religion is also philosophy, that it too is clothed in the form of ideas, whereas in reality it turns ideas into a project of action, thanks to which philosophy itself becomes a transition from thought to action.

"In religious foundations," says Soloviev, "a person with a weakened religious feeling, who has distanced himself from the foundations of faith and from the understanding of religious symbolism, which seems to him a collection of outdated and weathered forms, will find an explanation for them that does not contradict reason, is pleasing to the artistic feeling and comforting to the heart" (§ 9 and 10). But the foundations of religion are not at all so weak as to require such explanations and justifications; and the opponents of the foundations of religion are not at all so strong. True good, real, and not abstract, is such a power and strength that all who try to refute it or rebel against it must prostrate themselves before it as having no justification. If the rationalistic, limited to the circle of general logical concepts, contained projective concepts, and the empirical, limited to particular data of phenomenal reality, possessed general data, which would be obtained by observation and general experience, through the impact on phenomenal reality as a whole, in contrast to the partial experience produced in an artificial environment, then both directions, rationalistic and empirical, would converge not in the denial of being, as the knower and the known, but in the affirmation of both and the resurrection of the material, the corporeal.

Soloviev, however, remained a scientist, a professor; he did not rise to the recognition of knowledge not as a privilege of one class of "scientists", but as the right and duty of all rational beings. His "scholarly class" view is closely connected with the concept of philosophy itself, established in this circle, as a wisdom which, soaring high, does not consider it necessary to descend to the tasks of practical work. Philosophy, as a product of theoretical reason, can only be abstract. In order to become concrete and living knowledge, it must become knowledge not only of what is, but also of what should be, that is, it must turn from a passive speculative explanation of what exists into an active project of what should be, a project of universal work. Then two minds, theoretical and practical, will unite, and there will be no division of the learned and the unlearned into two separate classes; all living will be cognizant, and this knowledge will not be abstract, but living; knowledge will merge with work. It is incomprehensible how Solovyov, in saying that pure thinking without the empirical is impossible, does not see that by doing so he rejects philosophers who are locked in their own sphere, outside the people and without the people, and rejects theoretical reason without a project of action. It is amazing how Solovyov does not understand that from empirical data or, simply put, observations made here and there and then, true, reliable conclusions are impossible. Knowledge cannot be limited to the scientific offices of specialists for random and isolated observations and experiments. The entire people (in the corresponding distribution of tasks and methods of solving them) and even all nations must be brought into the work of cognition. Only then will knowledge become possible, and with it action. Otherwise, both science and philosophy will remain powerless. What else but a powerless and meaningless abstract concept will the “Concrete All-Unity Spirit” itself be if it does not oblige anyone to anything, does not change anything in the external world?..

For this philosopher, even ethics is not an action. He writes about the “ultimate goal and the highest good.” But it remains a mystery how and why an indefinite goal and an equally indefinite good are “achieved by a set of beings according to means of a logically necessary, absolutely integral course of world development (without our participation, therefore, and beyond our will! - N. F.), a development whose goal is the destruction of the material world as material, and its restoration as the kingdom of spirits in the universality of the Absolute Spirit." It is impossible to be more anti-Christian, more Buddhist! Remaining a Christian thinker, one could avoid both abstract formalism and personal destruction in the abyss of the Absolute Spirit. Let us put the Triune Spirit in place of the All-One Spirit, and we will receive a model for all sons and daughters in relation to their fathers - a model of what we should be not each individually, but all together. Here is the final goal and the highest good for the sons of deceased fathers, and an obvious goal. It is just as obvious for all the living, as the return of life to the dead. On the contrary, the concept of the ultimate goal, derived from mystical speculation, is fundamentally erroneous: to consider the ultimate goal to be “the destruction of the material” means identifying the latter with death. Soloviev saw the highest good not in the restoration of the real, but in the establishment of the mystical; it was not by chance that he left the Faculty of Physics and Mathematics for the sake of the “verbal” and philosophical, for the real power imparted to mankind by physics (knowledge of nature) seemed to him absolutely insignificant in comparison with the imaginary power granted by mysticism, magic, Kabbalah... In fact, the ultimate goal (universal resurrection) can be achieved not by the “destruction” of the material side of the world, not by the diminution of its resources, but by the unification and perfected development of all the forces of nature, material and spiritual, but by development not in the process of involuntary evolution, but in the conscious and volitional process of regulation by rational and moral beings, working together for a common cause.

Mystical means can be recognized only until real means appear, and there are already many of them at the present time, although there should be incomparably more: attempts to regulate the meteoric process, rain, hail, thunderstorms, the polar lights; attempts to divert underground thunderstorms, earthquakes; attempts to eradicate infectious diseases; counteracting the decrepitude of the organism; finally, attempts to revive the latter, for example, experiments in stimulating the activity of the heart many hours after the recognition of the onset of actual death... Here is the real path not to the abolition, but to the improvement of the material world and to its real, non-mystical spiritualization and revival. If Solovyov preferred Kabbalistic and similar means to real means of improving the world, then, perhaps, because they give greater power (albeit only imaginary) not to everyone, but only to the chosen ones? Solovyov wanted to be a superman all his life: sometimes a medium, sometimes a Kabbalist, and finally a prophet. "What should the heralds of the duty of resurrection be?" asked Solovyov; but the answer he received: <<*1>> "Nothing special and nothing isolated" did not satisfy him - was it because in that case he would have to renounce all privileges, whereas even in his posthumously published article about Lermontov he grants the privilege of immortality only to the superman. Like Tolstoy, he absolutely did not understand unconditional modesty: not to advance, not to show off, to fade into the background...

*1 Nikolai Fyodorovich (V.A.K.).