In the calendar order, it would be natural to set aside the first week, the week preparatory to repentance, for their special commemoration. Unfortunately, the Sadducees are not assigned a place in the series of penitential weeks; but, taking into account that Pharisaism, like Slavophilism, is only a mask, and that, consequently, the Pharisees are the same Sadducees, and the Slavophiles are the same Westerners, it is completely impossible to separate them from each other; they, who sinned with the same sin of insincerity, must have a common repentance.

And in the next week in the calendar-church order, the prodigal son is a Sadducee, and the eldest son is a Pharisee.

Pharisaism is an imaginary brotherhood and an invalid kinship. Sadduceism is defraternization and depatriation.

Westernism, denying the fatherland, replaces brotherhood with citizenship; Slavophilism recognizes an imaginary fatherland and an ineffective brotherhood.

Yazykov, who had a strong word and was accustomed to seeing attentive listeners, had to endure terrible moments at death, seeing that those who surrounded him ...., considered his friends, did not even deign to answer his question.<<*1>>

1 L. N. Tolstoy must also be counted among the Pharisees, although he is not a Slavophile and an enemy of the resurrection; V. Solovyov must also be added to the Sadducees, although he even admits the duty of resurrection.

*1 The question Yazykov mentioned here to his “friends” before his death about a book Yazykov had read was “Do they believe in the resurrection of the dead?” This is how Pogodin reports it (Moskvityanin, 1846, No. 11 and 12, pp. 254 and 258). Kireevsky (Complete Collected Works, 1, 97-99) reports the question this way: “Do they believe in the resurrection of souls?” Both this second edition “in the spirit of Origen” and especially the complete silence of the “friends” in response to Yazykov’s question, a silence understood by Nikolai Fyodorovich as a refusal to recognize the possibility of resurrection, caused his dislike for the Slavophiles, a dislike that explains many of his harsh expressions about them. As for the book that gave Yazykov a reason for this question, Nikolai Fyodorovich assumes that it was Charles Stofiels’ book “RИsurrection”. Paris, 1840, from which the following extracts have been preserved in N. F-ch’s manuscripts, indicating remarkable coincidences in the thoughts of the French writer with the teachings of Nikolai Fedorovich himself, who became acquainted with the book when his own views had long been formed:

“La nouvelle alliance de Dieu with l’homme rИtablit l’antique alliance de l’homme with the world. Le nouvel Adam est rИdevenu ce qu’Хtait l’homme primitif, — l’вme vivante de la terre: il a ressaisi sa puissance sur les йlйments, il a fait rentrer la nature sous sa providence. (Jean. XIV, 12, 13. Marc. XI, 24. Luc. XVII, 6. Matt. XXI, id. X, 8)”.

“Mais quelles plus grandes choses que celles que le Maôtre a faites sonts donc réservés ses disciples? Quels plus grands miracles sont possibles que de soumettre la Mort?”

“C’est a l’Humanité seule, constituée en Eqlise Universelle, fondue en unité, qu’il est réservé d’accomplir de plus grandes choses qu’a l’Homme-Dieu.”

"April 20, 1925. In order to restore the unity of God with man by his side and in the person of Christ, we must first establish the unity of man with man, and then restore it to its original state with Nature,—a triple unity that does not restore the unity of man to its original state." (V. A. K.)

[The new union of God with man restored the ancient union of man with the world. The new Adam became again what man originally was—the living soul of the earth: he regained his power over the elements, returned nature to his protection (John 14:12, 13; Mark 11:24; Luke 17:6; Matthew 21:21, Matthew 10:8)

But is there anything greater than what the Teacher Himself accomplished and commanded His disciples? Is a greater miracle possible than the victory over Death?

Only Humanity, organized into the Universal Church, merged into unity, is given the power to accomplish greater deeds than the God-man.

After the restoration of the unity of God with man through the deed and in the person of Christ, the unity of man with Nature must be immediately restored—a threefold union, the realization of which will lead to the universal resurrection (French).]