Nature, beginning to recognize itself in man, created for itself a head and a master.

If we consider the world exclusively from the theoretical side, as people who have devoted themselves only to knowledge do, then the phenomena observed by them, occurring in a certain order and space, will seem to them to be their own ideas, and for such people it will remain in doubt whether any thing or force exists outside of subjective thought, or whether all phenomena occur only in those who think about them? Scientists, apparently, prefer thinking to action; however, no matter how much they are protected by the labor of the unscientific from the influence of external nature, they still cannot help but feel their dependence on it, both outside themselves and in themselves. But scientists either treat this dependence passively, or seek a way out of it not in the realm of real liberation from the elemental forces of nature, but in the realm of merely speculative abstraction from reality. Theoretical reason comes to this conclusion with respect to the external world.

If we consider the world from the practical side, not hiding from ourselves and our fellow creatures our dependence and theirs, felt from without and from within, on an external force; if we become convinced that, contrary to our will and to the detriment of our lives, we replace our predecessors (fathers) and in turn are supplanted by our sons; if, finally, we recognize what strife, ulcers and what common destruction result from this, then we will no longer be able to recognize all these phenomena as only our own ideas; then we will have to recognize them as originating not from our thinking, but from a force that is outside of us and acts in us, striking us, but also killing us. We will be forced to realize that this force is not yet known and is not controlled by us, since we practically look at the world only from the side of utility and value (the so-called "wert-urtheile" <<*1>>), from which the utilization, exploitation and exhaustion of this force occurs, and not its regulation, not its control. It is not surprising that with such an attitude to forces and things, we have not only not been able to know what they are in essence, in themselves, but even what they are in their external manifestations. Not setting ourselves the task of business, we do not observe and do not study the forces of things everywhere, always and through everyone, and even less do we care about managing them, apparently not even assuming that it is precisely this management that will make us the will of forces, phenomena and things, as a result of which the "thing in itself" ("about itself" Ding an sich) will truly become our thing, that is, acquired by business and labor. The question of the two minds is thus resolved not in a speculative-passive manner, but actively: by combining universally obligatory education (in the sense of knowledge) with universally obligatory military service, which must transform from a struggle with one's own kind into a victorious study of the irrational forces of nature in terms of regulating them by us.

If this is true, then the meaning of the call so popular these days "Back to Kant!" becomes clear. "Back" here means a return to disunity, to a narrow practicality from the imaginary breadth of theoretical knowledge. "Forward" "from Kant!" will be a call to unite the two minds through the expansion of the subject (object) of practical reason to the breadth and depth of theoretical reason.

In this case, God, recognized by theoretical reason only as an ideal, will be recognized and acknowledged in the active-regulatory structure of knowledge as a Being who through humanity carries out the covenant, project and plan of a universal and world-wide undertaking, turning both the human race and nature into an instrument of the will and goodness of God, thereby destroying alienation from God, and with it, disgrace or curse.

Then psychology will also be transformed from general into universal, collective, will become a psychocracy, that is, an internal and external unification of the human race in the work of knowing and managing the soulless force of the cosmos. Psychology, having become inseparable from cosmology, will make the resurrected generations the mind and soul of all the worlds of the universe.

*1 Judgment of value (German).