On the 500th Anniversary of the Discovery of the Holy Relics of Sergius of Radonezh,
Peacemaker and Deliverer from Troubles

1. S.A. Belokurov. On the Provision of Information Concerning the Common Churches and the Life of St. Sergius of Radonezh.
2. Ditto. Inquiry to the Riga Archaeological Congress of 1896.
3. Les epidemies psychique et la foule criminelle. Revue des revues. 1894. No. 1.

And for any previous archaeological congress, Uvarov's question, proposed by Mr. Belokurov: "was there anything similar to our common churches in the West and was it borrowed from there, or is the custom of building such churches in times of trouble a native phenomenon," would have been of great importance; but it is especially appropriate for the congress that will meet in Riga, on the border of Russia with the West, where, apparently, all the conditions for a comprehensive discussion of the matter will be combined, where Western scholars, spiritual and secular*, can take part in its solution. Riga is located in the vicinity of Pskov and Novgorod, in which, as in the entire forested North of Russia, and in all likelihood [in] Siberia, ordinary churches were most often built.

Ordinary churches, i.e. churches built by a vow with joint efforts in one day, are monuments to unanimity and agreement in prayer and work, in thought and deed, an agreement so rare on earth in general, and especially in Russia, whose history began with the recognition of the vice of discord in itself and by this, as it were, indicated its ultimate goal - agreement and unanimity. In order to eliminate external discord, Rus' calls upon a foreigner, and for internal reconciliation accepts Christianity, under the influence of which discord turns into agreement, so that the construction of ordinary churches even in such classic places of discord as Novgorod and Pskov, reminiscent of Western cities in their lively (extermination) struggle, testifies to a deep internal need for agreement, even if it was short-lived in reality. At the veche, usually stormy and noisy, often turning into a massacre, silence was restored, and the question of building ordinary churches was decided instantly, unanimously, without debate.

Usually unanimity (not to mention unanimity) is considered impossible and even undesirable. Unanimity in an institution is looked upon as a vice leading to destruction; and meanwhile, the construction of ordinary churches, a holy cause, did not find a single opponent. From this we can conclude that the main reason for discord is hidden not in people, but in the absence of an absolutely good and holy cause, a cause that would be equally dear to everyone. A temple erected in one day, no matter how small it was, is a miracle, and all the more marvelous because it was erected by labor without money (“the working people did not take a bribe”) and by all the people: “some used wood and built it; others laid it for the foundation, and others brought wood from various places, for there was nothing ready for the construction of the temple, but everything was brought from various places”108, i.e. it was required that everything be labor-intensive and nothing free.

These were bright moments in our lives: “for there was no theft, robbery, lies and slander, anger, rage and insult, and all kinds of malice to be seen or heard in the city or in the villages; but there was great love.” At these moments, our people were truly Christian, for in unanimous, selfless work for the benefit of the common, holy cause, the moral significance of the highest dogma of Christianity is revealed, the dogma of the Holy Trinity, unmerged and indivisible, where unity is not subordination, and unmergedness is not discord. In this unanimity, uniting many for a single cause, lies, perhaps, the key to what Rus' is, what its originality is and what it is capable of. In this country of rare moments of agreement, but agreement not only external, but also internal, that is, unanimity, the Venerable Sergius erected the Church of the Holy Trinity as a model of the greatest virtue of unanimity, not momentary, but eternal, of course, in order to turn these rare moments of agreement among the people into a permanent state, into an inseparable unity, and thus begin the implementation of that final goal, which was hidden in the very recognition of the vice and sin of discord. The Church of the Holy Trinity in the monastery of Sergius was "like a mirror." That is why the monastery of the Holy Trinity served both as a denunciation of discord and a call for unification. The view of this image of unanimity and agreement did not allow the Muscovite state to perish from the Shemyakinsky strife109 and to lose unity precisely when new hostile factions appeared. The Trinity of the Kazan, Crimean and especially Ottoman Hordes, which destroyed Constantinople, which made Moscow the last refuge of Orthodoxy, and it, together with the name of the Third Rome, took on a new duty, began to understand its purpose in world history. After the fall of the Second Rome, Old Rome, in the person of the popes and Poland betrayed to them, taking advantage of our discord, conceived of striking Orthodoxy in its last refuge and turning us into an instrument of its lust for power to suppress the Protestant uprising, which could have been accomplished in the Thirty Years' War, if the papacy had managed to enslave the Muscovite state; but the capture of Moscow by the Poles only showed that the true capital was the Holy Trinity Monastery of St. Sergius. It united the entire people "as one man" and saved not only Russia, but also the West: for the exclusive dominance of Catholicism, i.e., a spiritual yoke without any protest, would be as evil as the exclusive dominance of Protestant strife, not restrained by any authority; their joint existence clearly shows that good lies in the Kingdom of the Life-Giving Trinity, where unity is not a yoke, and independence is not strife.

Such is the logical connection between the question of building ordinary churches as monuments of unanimity, and the work of the life of the Venerator of the Holy Trinity, Sergius of Radonezh, the Peacemaker and Deliverer from troubles. This is precisely the saint that is needed in the era we are living through, so Mr. Belokurov is completely right in combining them in his appeal for information on this subject. This appeal was sent to all the editorial offices of the Diocesan News, archival commissions, and other institutions. We take this opportunity to announce it to the readers of the Russian Archive. Here it is.

“Despite the importance of the issue of building ordinary churches, it has been little studied. In view of this, it is highly desirable to collect, if possible, everything that is known about the construction of ordinary churches in Russia, both special stories about this, and all the minor news and indications of the fact itself. The construction of ordinary churches according to the conditions of consecration in some places could be replaced by construction in the same way, i.e., the participation of the greatest number and in the shortest time of large chapels for the performance of divine services. It is desirable to have information about the construction and their.
For the upcoming five hundredth anniversary of the discovery of the relics of St. Sergius, Abbot of Radonezh, it is also desirable to bring to the fullest possible knowledge: 1) everything that has been written and printed, especially in local publications, about St. Sergius, lists of his life, stories about the discovery of his relics and posthumous miracles; and 2) the history of the spread of the veneration of this holy man, i.e. where there are churches or chapels in them dedicated to St. Sergius, as well as how widespread in one locality or another is the pilgrimage to the Trinity-Sergius Lavra to venerate the tomb of the Saint.
An attempt to index what was printed in Russia about Sergius was placed in No. 10 and 12 of the "Bibliographic Notes" of 1892. It is desirable to have information omitted here or correcting any errors. Those wishing to help in this matter are asked to send their messages to Moscow, Sadovniki, No. 8, S.A. Belokurov. The names of those who have provided information will be placed on the title page of the collection of this information and will testify that the spirit that created ordinary churches is still alive in Russia." Despite the importance of the above appeal, some Diocesan Gazettes refused to print it. Fortunately, there were few like-minded people with such a complete unwillingness to provide even weak assistance in a good cause; but then, as we were told, there were few active helpers, and all the more reason to be grateful to these few responsive people. It is with particular pleasure that we include their names in our publication and, for our part, we add our sincere gratitude for the assistance they have rendered in a matter equally dear to all Russians, in the matter of preparation for the unanimous celebration by all of Russia (i.e., Great and Little, White, New Russia, not only Eastern and Northern, but also Western and Southern) of the 500th anniversary of the discovery of the holy relics of Sergius, i.e., his relics, which manifested themselves with even greater force after death than during life, the relics that saved our fatherland from both Eastern and Western invasions, performing miracles outside of it, in Latin, to save Orthodoxy from submission to the papal yoke*. But, having saved from submission, from discord, he, we dare to believe, will be a “quick helper” in the matter of our reconciliation with the West, a reconciliation that does not exclude, but presupposes our originality; in ordinary churches, one must assume, it is contained: for among Western peoples we do not even encounter the word "ordinary".

In response to the appeal of S.A. Belokurov, as far as we know, information was received from both sides of Russia about the veneration of Sergius. This information can be considered typical for the two regions of Russia, North-Eastern and South-Western. The first turns out to be a zealous venerator of Sergius, the other has heard little or nothing about the great ascetic of the North, the defender and breadwinner of the Russian people.

One piece of news comes from the Lukoyanovsky district of the Nizhny Novgorod province, from the village of Staro-Rozhdestveno (or Staroselye, also Tagaeva) and Shishardeyevo. The very names of the villages indicate their foreign origin, and the information reported from them testifies to their complete Russification. From the reports of the priest of these villages, Father John Lavrov, we learn that although in the said villages there are no churches or chapels named after Sergius, nevertheless, the day of September 25 is revered as a church holiday. Looking through the calendar of the Nizhny Novgorod diocese, we are surprised to notice in this region, which has shown so much love for the fatherland, an almost complete absence of churches dedicated to the memory of St. Sergius, with whose name inseparably linked with it is love for the fatherland. That is why the messages of Father John are precious to us, and it would be very desirable for other priests to follow the example of the venerable pastor of Staro-Rozhdestven. They prove that the names borne by churches do not always indicate those saints who enjoy the greatest veneration of the population; that is why living, local messages are needed: only from them can one form a complete idea of ​​the veneration of the Reverend within the borders of Russia. Parents often, writes Father John, ask that their children be named Sergius; in many houses there are icons of him. Pilgrimage is very developed, and there are, apparently, annual visitors to the Lavra, who regard it as their parish church, where they go for fasting*. Completely different information comes from the other end of Russia, from Osip Ivanovich Fedorov, a teacher at the Kamenets-Podolsk Theological Seminary. There are no ordinary churches in Podolia and never have been110. Father Tikhon Chulkov, a priest from the city of Solvychegodsk, speaks about ordinary churches in his letter. All this information will be fully included in Mr. Belokurov's book, which we are eagerly awaiting.

While expressing our deep gratitude to all who responded to Mr. Belokurov's appeal, we must point out that essentially the same request is coming from the West from representatives of the newly emerging science of "Collective Psychology". This science, which studies the psychology of the crowd, almost unanimously, through the lips of all its Western adherents, asserts that a gathering of people, "a crowd, produces as a result something much worse than the individuals who make it up could produce"111. "Let them show me an army, no matter how well it is composed, which could act better on its own initiative (spontanement) than according to a plan drawn up by the most mediocre staff officer"**. In a word, among Western scientists (Siegel, Barbaste, Tarda, Ferri, Nordau113) the opinion is widespread that the crowd acts on individual units in a degrading manner, the collective activity of a gathering of people is likened to mental epidemics, a gathering of people is a crowd, where the lowest instincts and passions always predominate*.

But the construction of ordinary churches clearly refutes this opinion. It turns out that the conviction of our people is more justified that the aggregate of people does not form a crowd with unbridled, crude aspirations, in which the reasonable average person turns into a savage, a beast, but a "world", i.e. a society in which harmony and unity reign, for a single cause, in which the sinful element of individual constituent units is swept away, and man is purified from the sanctity of the common cause and reaches an unprecedented spiritual height.

Thus, the history of ordinary churches is also unusually important for the West. But in order to resolve the issue of them, it is necessary to penetrate into the depths of the people's soul, and meanwhile even for experts in Russian life, such as V. I. Dal, ordinary churches were like a legend, i.e. a myth, although the construction of such a church in Vologda dates back to the reign of Alexei Mikhailovich. We hope that the issue under discussion will find a proper answer at the Riga Congress, and then, what could be better than the 500th anniversary of the celebration of the discovery of the relics of St. Sergius, i.e. in 1922, to give the same question an answer in deed, proving that the spirit that created ordinary churches has not yet died out in Russia, by which we would show ourselves to be true worshipers of the Life-giving Trinity, uniting all sons at the monument of all deceased fathers.

The Committee of the Archaeological Congress should translate this question into foreign languages ​​and send it to all archaeological societies of Europe and America.

We have heard that a Collection is planned, in which all news about the discovery of the relics of the Saint, and especially all the posthumous miracles of a historical nature, should be collected. The chronicle of posthumous miracles is, of course, not yet finished.

But not only peasant women; there were some peasants who considered their presence at the jubilee celebration to be the highest goal of their lives, to see this holiday and die and be buried in this holy place! And they saw and died: one in the Lavra itself, the other on the way out of it. Some families show special veneration for the Saint. It must be assumed that for many residents of the Lowlands, the Lavra is almost the same as Jerusalem.

The example of Gorny Dubnyak completely refutes the above reference. The original plan for taking Dubnyak was drawn up by such an outstanding strategist as Gurko112.

Among Russian scholars, A.A. Tokarsky resolutely refuses to accept this opinion 114.

COMMENTS
107 Published according to: “Russian Archive”, 1894, No. 11, pp. 448-453. The article was written between the end of July and the beginning of October 1894. Fedorov intended to summarize in it the first data received in response to the publication of the appeal “On the provision of information concerning ordinary churches ...”, and also to once again draw public attention to the lost tradition of ordinary church building, to stimulate the collection of new materials (“Reviews were received only from two places: from Solvychegodsk and from the Nizhny Novgorod province,” he reported on October 21 (Brya 1894 N.P. Peterson). In this article, the question of ordinary temples was first considered by the thinker against the background of theories of collective psychology, and was put forward as a counterweight to the idea of ​​the "criminal crowd". This turn of the topic was to a large extent stimulated by the article "Les epidemies psychiques et la foule criminelle" ("Psychic Epidemics and the Criminal Crowd"), which appeared in the first issue of the journal "Revue des revues" for 1894 (pp. 54-58, signed "J.F."). Reporting on the new theory put forward by Italian, French, German psychologists and criminological sociologists (see preamble and note 113), the author of the article pointed out the different, perhaps even directly opposite attitudes towards it among Western European and Russian scientists. If the former, for the most part, greeted the theory of the "criminal crowd" with enthusiasm, considering it a breakthrough in psychological science, then the latter were not only reserved, but sometimes even downright negative. Further, a short summary of articles by opponents of this theory was given - A.A. Tokarsky (see note 114) and L.E. Obolensky ("The Newest Pseudo-Science" // Russkaya Mysl, 1893, No. 11, pp. 122-142). The critical arguments they presented prompted Fedorov to give his own assessment of the theory of the "criminal crowd", to find a refutation for it not only in the sphere of thought and word, but also in real history. For him, ordinary churches became such a refutation. In the Russian Archives, the article “Ordinary Churches in Rus'” was published with the assistance of Yu. P. Bartenev (see the above-cited letter from Fedorov to N. P. Peterson). — 54.

108 This and the following quotes were taken by Fedorov from the “Tale of the Construction of an Ordinary Church in Vologda.” For their translation, see notes 92, 40.— 55.

109 This is about the struggle of Prince Dmitry Shemyaka and other appanage princes against Grand Duke Vasily II the Dark. It lasted for almost a decade (1441-1450), occasionally interspersed with reconciliations (in one of them, the abbot of the Trinity Lavra, Zinovy, took an active part) and ended with the victory of Vasily II (who especially revered St. Sergius - there is a detailed account of his pilgrimage to the Trinity, during which he was captured by princes hostile to him, by Karamzin), who by the end of his reign united in his hands almost all the appanages of the Moscow principality. — 55.

110 This information was delivered to Fedorov through V.A. Kozhevnikov: “I am very grateful to you for the information from Kamenets-Podolsk,” we read in a letter dated July 25, 1894. “But how can one explain the existence of a church called “ordinary” in the province neighboring Podolsk, in Vladimir-Volynsky itself, as is evident from the work of P. Batyushkov entitled “Volyn.” Could you ask this question, when you write, to your Kamenets-Podolsk correspondent?” — 57.

111 Quote from the article “Les epidemies psychiques et la foule criminelle” // Revues des revues, 1894, No. 1, p. 54.— 57.

112 This is an episode of the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-1878, related to the period of the struggle for Plevna. The plan for decisive actions to encircle Plevna was drawn up by the head of the cavalry of the Western detachment, the future Field Marshal General Iosif Vladimirovich Gurko (1828-1901). As part of this plan, the detachment led by Gurko captured the important Turkish stronghold of Gorny Dubnyak on October 12, 1877, and in the battle for Gorny Dubnyak, the decisive role was played by the bold and proactive actions of the soldiers themselves. — 57.

113 The concept of the "criminal crowd" was based on the theory of imitation, developed in the works of the French sociologist and criminologist Gabriel Tarde (1843-1904). Considering the ability to imitate as one of the fundamental properties of human nature, Tarde pointed out its defining role in social life, in the development of various social formations, group and public values ​​and norms. Developing Tarde's ideas, most fully formulated in his work "Le lois de l'imitation. Etude sociologique", Paris, 1890 (Russian translation "Laws of Imitation", St. Petersburg, 1892), the Italian scientist Scipio Sigele in his book "La delinquenza settaria" (French translation "La Foule Criminelle. Essai de psychologie collective" - ​​Paris, 1892 - "The Criminal Crowd. An Experience of Collective Psychology") undertook a targeted study of crowd psychology. His conclusions were that the crowd is by its very nature criminogenic, and that base, cruel instincts always triumph in the individuals who make it up at the moment of excitement. The crowd instantly becomes electrified and is capable of any destructive action. To prove his judgments, Sigele drew on a wide range of historical material, psychological and criminological data, and statements by philosophical and scientific authorities. Among them, he mentioned the Italian criminologist Enrico Ferri, referring to his book “Nuovi Orrizonti”. He quoted Barbaste’s work “De l’homicide et de l’anthropophagie” (Paris, 1856) (“On Manslaughter and Anthropophagy”): “What happens in the hearts of people when they all rush to murder, to shed blood? Where does this passion for imitation come from, which takes hold of them and irresistibly draws them to destroy themselves and each other? At the culmination of the study, we dwell on the original predisposition of our nature to murder, to instinctive rage, which finds powerful support in the tendency to imitation." And his own conclusion that the intellectual and moral level of a crowd is always lower than the level of its constituent individuals, he based on the ideas of the writers A. Gibelli and M. Nordau (see note 48 to "Supramoralism" - Vol. I of this edition, p. 513), referring to his book "Paradoxe" ("Paradoxes", 5th ed. Paris, 1891). Following S. Sigele, a book of the same name ("La foule criminelle", Paris, 1892, Russian translation: "Crimes of the crowd", Kazan, 1893) was also published by G. Tarde. Based on his own theory of imitation and continuing the thoughts of Sigele, Tarde declared: the crowd, among other social organisms, is a phenomenon of a lower order, a step backward in social evolution. The crowd is a “wild, mad, unrestrained beast,” “a blind plaything of its instincts and routine habits, and sometimes resembles an invertebrate of a lower order, a kind of monstrous worm.” Tarde was especially against the “unanimity” and homogeneity of ideas and convictions characteristic of the crowd. They are always, he claimed, “the result of only one-sided imitation.” The crowd is flat-bottomed, dull and incapable of either great deeds or creativity—both belong only to the individual, and the individual in the crowd is invariably suppressed, cowered, drowned, mercilessly crushed by it. -58.

114 In the article “Les epidemies psychiques et la foule criminelle”, on the data of which Fedorov relies here, an abstract was given of the speech of the psychiatrist Ardalion Ardalionovich Tokarsky (1859-1901) “Mental Epidemics”, delivered by him at the 4th annual meeting of the Society of Neuropathologists and Psychiatrists at Moscow University on October 23, 1893 and then published in the journal “Problems of Philosophy and Psychology” (1893, v. 5 (20), pp. 203-223; separate reprint: M., 1893). In polemics with the supporters of the theory of the criminal crowd, Tokarsky pointed out that such frequent examples of destructive actions of the crowd are caused not so much by its internal properties (increased ability to "psychic contagions", infectiousness, etc.), as by those ideas that take hold of large masses of people and completely subordinate their activity to themselves. And the question is not in suppressing social, collective movements (for in them is the "basic law of life"), but in properly orienting them, inspiring them with a good ideal, directing them toward creation. “If the world is destined,” concluded Tokarsky, “to experience a vast mental epidemic in the near future, let it be an epidemic of the desire for light and knowledge, a movement arising from love for humanity, for work and for the peaceful prosperity and well-being of peoples, then the same phenomena of imitation, contagion and suggestibility will serve not as causes of unrest, but as elements of the calm, progressive development of the masses” (Problems of Philosophy and Psychology, 1893, v. 5, p. 223). — 58.