(About Wagner and Nietzsche's thoughts about the task of art)

Ideological painting and software music want abstract thoughts to portray, draw and express the first with paints, and the latter with sounds; Symbolic poetry wants the very “word act not its content, but with sounds; Speech, having lost certainty, should become indefinite music. "" 1 >> The other part of the symbolists goes even further; it requires that the word causes not only a musical feeling, but also a colorful impression, create harmony or dissonances as if lights. <<*1 "At the same time, the priests of the" art of the future "are completely forgotten that the highest task of art is not to portray, not to draw distracted thoughts (which is red creation of only similarities, that is, to an illusion), and indicate the path in artistic form and in creative perception to create a draft of the work itself, the most true task of the human race. That is why the artistic expression of this task or this project can be a temple-school, and by no means a theater, and less than a tragic theater, intended for depicting the death of the world, as opposed to the painting of the Church of the School, which is an educational image of the recreation of the world, that is, resurrection.

Program music should be extraramous, that is, it should accompany the united genus of the human in the conversion of the tools of struggle (military guns) into the instruments of salvation. In the ministry of this task, a new, boundless and noble field for music both military and spiritual (religious) is revealed.

As for the poetry that deviated from the field of certain concepts into the sphere of uncertain consonant and ghostly light (colorful) impressions, this, obviously, is a return to instinctive, animal life, as well as going out of good and evil, there is a return to animal, not knowing shame. Poetry falling to unconscious, unclear emotions - what degeneration of what was once considered the "language of the gods"! ..

1 Chinese letter is there not an ideological painting and languages ​​at all - is not symbolic poetry?

*1 Attempts of this kind we meet with music innovers, for example, Skryabin, according to what was recently written about this (V. A. K.).