There are three periods or two transitions in the history of the letter: from reverently revered to the respected and from here to the despicable; This is the story of the charter, half a century and a cursive. If the first is written with the same reverence, with which it is read, then the latter is an expression of negligence in both.

Hieroglyphic or, more precisely, an ideographic letter never died. It is universally, all -haired, while a phonetic letter is the belonging of one class. We could, not without reason, call it Protestant, philosophical, Buddhist ... But not one of these negative forces, nor even Buddhism, have yet reached their goal - destruction; And they still cannot be content only phonetic and are forced to resort to symbolic or ideographic to signs.
The phonetic letter has such shortcomings, and the ideographic advantages are that the first to never replace the second. Everything is forced to have, but everything should have its own symbolic, figurative expression containing a lot in the small. Even ridiculed with a short -sighted or unwilling to delve into the meaning of the modernity of the coats of arms are deeply substantial. If the noble coats of arms seem to be a work of vanity (which is not true, because the coats of arms should indicate the kinship of childbirth, and not the advantages of one kind over another, which is already abuse), then peasant emblems are a work of pure necessity. Artists have their own monograms. Every event, every new phenomenon requires a sign, designating its meaning and content, as well as a word. The first sign of Christianity itself was the monogram of Christ, composed of the first two letters of His name, then turning into a cross, then connected to the cross:


Here we have the reverse transformation of phonetic writing into an ideographic one.


- This is the sign of Christ crucified. The next monogram


- Christ triumphant.
The merger of two or few letters in one is a monogrammal letter, to which other signs joined. A cross piercing a dragon, or a monogram connected to


, which is piercing in a snake curled up by a ring, means the victory of Christianity over pagan wisdom, since the snakes of the goddess of wisdom are depicted on a helmet; The serpent is wrapped in the tripod of the god of arts, poetry, in the form of which divination were given; The snake and an Aesculapa in the wand ... Orthodoxy in the fight against the Arians joined the letter Yu and T to the monogram of Christ to refer to the divine nature of Christ ...
<Not finished>