The article "Disarmament", reprinted from "New Time" in issues 154 and 156 of the newspaper "Askhabad" for 1901,[1] needs to have its title corrected, which, not corresponding to the content of the article, is even in some contradiction with it; it would be more correct to call the article not "Disarmament", but "On the impossibility of disarmament", because this article speaks not only of the impossibility, but also of the undesirability of disarmament, it speaks at the same time of the possibility, the absolute necessity and desirability of turning weapons, i.e. both destructive weapons and all other weapons used for war, and even everything that is used, applied, that can and will be applied to military affairs - into instruments of salvation. And such a conversion of weapons into instruments of salvation is an act entirely natural, but natural for nature, not blind, but coming through us, through the human race, into consciousness, and through us having felt the utter unnaturalness of the use of weapons against our own kind, having felt deep remorse, and with it the desire to correct all the evil that has been done. This correction of evil, understood in an ever broader sense, cannot but be elevated to a debt, and must even naturally become an unconditional demand, a demand of human nature itself, i.e., filial nature. Such is the genesis of thought and deed, or the project of a natural transition from war, wars in general, not to peace, which must be recognized as impossible, but to the union of all peoples already obliged by military service—to a union for the cause of universal salvation. Peace is impossible just as inaction is impossible, just as abstinence from action is impossible; man is an active being and cannot help but do, and if he does not know what he should do, he will do what he should not; Only then will we not do what is improper when we know what must be done, and devote all our strength to the cause in which we recognize our duty; only then will we not fight when we recognize it as possible, and consequently also as obligatory, to turn the forces now wasted in wars, in mutual struggle, to the cause of universal salvation. And universal compulsory military service, with the gradual circulation of weapons, with the transition of weapons into instruments of salvation, as giving everyone a common cause, imposing a duty on everyone, must be accepted by all peoples as a great good, as a good much, incomparably greater than the rights given by the first French Revolution, rights supposedly inalienable and nevertheless constantly violated. And how can these rights remain unviolated, when the right of one is an oppression of another; and with the consciousness of all their rights, mutual oppression gives rise to struggle, war; the consciousness not of rights, but of duty, to which universal compulsory military service leads, will lead to the elimination of struggle, of war. And at the same time, would not the call for military service of Christians in Turkey be their equalization with Muslims; and, of course, for such an equalization of Turkey it is necessary to recognize that Islam is not a religion of war, as is asserted by many panegyrists of the religion of Mohammed?! In the same way, the call of Hindus for universal military service, would not be the elevation of all the lower Hindu castes to the ranks of Kshatriyas, i.e., to the nobility, and would not this call be a more reliable guarantee against the oppression of the present rulers of India than universal suffrage or elections, which are so easily abused? And the proposal on the part of the European peoples to the Chinese government to introduce universal military service, would not be an act of magnanimity, i.e., a renunciation of the division of China?! If military service were introduced everywhere, then would not a new peace conference, convened by the same Tsar as the first, be made necessary, in view of the obvious fruitlessness of international arbitration courts, to find new means, new methods for peacemaking? That international arbitration courts are completely fruitless has been too clearly and vividly demonstrated by the war between the English and the Boers, in which history itself seemed to have decided to convince the peoples of the uselessness of arbitration courts and the need to seek another way to eliminate war and preserve peace. For believers, the participation of Providence is undoubtedly involved here, turning even the evil that people do into the general good; and the good would be great if the peoples heeded the lesson that follows from the Boer War, that is, if they understood the uselessness of arbitration courts, and in that case the blood shed by both the Boers and the English would be fruitful, would bear great fruit. Having rejected arbitration as a means unsuitable for eliminating war, shall we not find this means in adding to universal compulsory military service also universal and also compulsory education through schools, in which education is combined with the expansion of knowledge itself, science; science, with such a method of expansion, i.e., with expansion not only through individual scientists, but through schools, through the joint work of teachers and students, having become the knowledge of each people of itself and its country, will make the schools of all peoples truly national, and at the same time will introduce students to the very business of knowledge, teach oil will turn the younger generation into doers, into explorers and introducers to the work of research; teachers, thus, will cease to be only teachers, only preparers for the work that they themselves have never done, and therefore practically, that is, in the real way, do not know. Is it surprising that the knowledge acquired in such a school as it is now turns out to be of no use at all, and after the last exam one can only forget it!.. Schools, having become - through the accession to education and the knowledge of each people of itself and its country - truly national, will not, however, introduce any hostility towards other peoples, for by facilitating and even directly leading to the conversion of weapons, i.e., instruments of destruction, into instruments of salvation, such schools will lead to the awareness of the impossibility of making such a transition for each people separately from other peoples, will lead to the awareness that each people is only a part of the whole human race, a part that will be fruitless without unification with all other peoples. Moreover, these schools, national for all, will lead to unification in religion, understood as a deed, for, uniting everyone in one deed, these schools must also lead to unanimity, to one faith, i.e., leading to unity in deed, they will also lead to unity in dogma. Thus, the conversion of weapons of war and everything used in war into instruments of salvation is not only a great moral, but also a religious act, a truly Christian act and one that constitutes the distinctive feature of Orthodoxy, a feature that not only does not separate Orthodoxy from Catholicism and Protestantism, but leads it to unification with them on the question of redemption, i.e., salvation, by deeds or only by faith, on the fundamental question and so sharply dividing Catholics and Protestants, introducing such irreconcilable hostility between them. It is significant that the question of redemption has hardly been the subject of debate or clarification in the Greco-Russian or Greco-Slavic Church; let us hope for its resolution by this Church in the sense that it is not the deeds that have no relation to salvation itself that are saving, but only the one, common deed of real salvation from hunger, illness, and, finally, from death, to which both hunger and illness lead; it is to this deed that weapons are turned, gradually transforming, passing from instruments of destruction into instruments of real salvation, i.e., redemption. If the Catholic Church attributes to the Crusades, to these wars recognized as sacred, a saving power, not in themselves, however, contained, not produced by them, since the salvation obtained through these wars is only a reward given for them, then the war is not with one's own kind, but with an unreasonable, blind force, with a deadening force, a war that directly delivers, redeems from the sin of displacement, this war with a blind force as a deed, as the fulfillment of the will of God, which constitutes the essence of Orthodoxy, is already salvation itself, direct salvation, produced by ourselves, and not received only as a reward. With such a resolution of the question of salvation, Orthodoxy will become truly universal, will reconcile and unite not only Catholicism and Protestantism, but also all existing religions. The combination of universal compulsory education and learning with universal compulsory military service will destroy the class character of knowledge and make it the property of all, with the conversion, through universal compulsory military service, of the entire people into a force for natural science; then experiment will also be transformed from artificial into natural, produced not in laboratories, but in nature itself, i.e. such experiment will introduce or introduce regulation into the world, whereby a posteriori knowledge will be brought into line with a priori, will acquire universality and necessity for the management of all, of the entire human race—in the aggregate, by the blind force of nature. Such regulation, management by blind force, will be a truly sacred matter, and will force all observations and experience that constitute this matter to be treated with all the seriousness that is required by a religious matter, and will not allow them to be treated disdainfully, as matters that have no direct relation to military affairs. Thus, Mr. Simonov’s fair remark in his article “Military Thoughts on Civilian Matters” (“N. Vr.”, March 1899, No. 8280) about the complete impracticality of the method proposed in the article “Disarmament” for implementing the idea contained in the article will be eliminated, for this method is impractical only “under the existing state of affairs,” as Mr. Simonov himself admits, having treated the article “Disarmament” so attentively and kindly, which remained almost unnoticed and even caused mockery on the part of some who obviously did not read it; moreover, it must be said that Simonov could not see from this article itself that the duty of observation and experimentation is imposed on the troops as a religious matter. The article “Disarmament” needs not only to be corrected, but also to be supplemented with everything that has appeared on the issue discussed in it since its publication on October 14, 1898 in “New Time”. Speaking about the conversion of the army into natural scientists force, military affairs in the research, study of nature, and basing such a purpose of the army and military affairs on the data collected on the battlefield, which lead to the conclusion about the possibility of causing rain by means of explosives, then pointing out the need to study the apparatus proposed by Karazin, consisting of a lightning rod raised on a tethered balloon, the need to study this apparatus through the troops, which will not require any special expenses, since the "balloon", if not yet fully formed, is already becoming a military weapon, the article goes on to say: "and not only the study of the effect of explosives on atmospheric phenomena, even with the addition to their action and action by means of a weapon proposed by Karazin 85 years ago, but also everything that is applied to military affairs can be tested through the troops not only as a useful means in war, but also as a means of regulation, control of natural phenomena." On this basis, the troops must be charged with investigating the method recently proposed by Stanoevich, which consists of “attaching a strong electric bell or a low- or high-pitched siren to a kite similar to those used in modern meteorology for air research, or to a small tethered balloon, capable of producing in the clouds themselves, so to speak, on the spot, air vibrations significantly stronger than those caused by the vortex rings of mortars. <1> The height of the balloon or kite, of course, can always be changed in accordance with the height of the clouds, thus placing the apparatus in the best conditions for action. The balloon or kite is held by a steel wire together with two other insulated wires (copper or aluminum), conducting electric current to the bell from a battery on the ground. It would also be possible to raise the battery onto the balloon if the traction force allowed it.” (V. R-kov, "Fighting Hail", "New Time" 1901). The apparatus just described is intended for fighting hail only, but in the article from which this description is taken, the hope is expressed that it will provide "the ability to disperse hail clouds, or prevent a downpour, or, on the contrary, cause rain during a drought"; therefore, the instrument proposed by Stanoevich can serve to control meteoric phenomena in general; the method of control by means of this instrument is based on the position that "electrical discharges, which are credited with an important role in the formation of hail, can be softened and changed by air vibrations"; based on this, Stanoevich "proposes a project for an electrosonic hail safety device that produces strong air vibrations at significant heights." In urging the necessity of testing the method proposed by Stanoevich and described in L’Illustration, 1901, No. 3052, “without fearing any expenses for this test,” V. R-kov, in the above-cited article of his “Fighting Hail,” notes: “military air parks could conduct such experiments without unnecessary expenses and without prejudice to their direct activities”... “Balls and kites in parks and observatories are always ready for flight, it remains only to equip them with an electric bell.”

Fighting hail by firing mortars has been rapidly spreading in recent times in Italy, Switzerland, Spain, Hungary, Dalmatia and other parts of Austria (“Preventing Hail by Firing Mortars,” Prav. Vestn., 1902, No. 10); Experiments in this fight are also being carried out here, in the Crimea and the Caucasus, and “have yielded unconditionally favorable results,” as stated in the article by V. R-v, “The First Russian Hail-Fighting Mortar,” published in issue No. 40 of the Moskovskiye Vedomosti for 1902. The fight against hail is, of course, the beginning of regulation, control of meteoric phenomena, to which an appeal is made in the article “Disarmament” and in all the articles preceding it and mentioned in it, published, beginning with the famine year of 1891, in the “Russian Archive,” “Penza Provincial Gazette,” the newspaper “Don,” and elsewhere, for by firing from mortars hail clouds are not only dispersed, but also “transformed into beneficial rain clouds,” as stated in the above-cited article “Preventing Hail by Firing from Mortars”; in the article “The First Russian Hail Mortar” it is stated that “the essence of hail prevention lies, as noted, in causing rain from hail clouds,” and therefore “there is a very likely basis for using hail mortars in the future to combat drought. And if in the warm season mortar firing is able to cause rain, then in the cold season the same firing can cause snow, which is very important for protecting winter crops by covering them with snow in a timely manner. The same likely success in the future can be brought by using hail mortars to protect gardens and vineyards from morning frosts, etc.”

Thus, in view of the spread of hail stations in Italy, France, Switzerland, Spain, Austria, the Crimea and the Caucasus, in view of the fact that even hail insurance companies are reducing insurance payments where hail stations are set up ("On the Question of Artillery Fight against Hail", "Russk. Vedomosti", 1901, Nos. 178 and 191), it is difficult to doubt the validity of the means proposed for controlling meteoric phenomena and consisting of action by means of explosives. Control of meteoric phenomena is such an important subject, requires action over such vast areas, and finally, the means for this (explosives) are so dangerous that they cannot be the subject of activity of individuals, and must become the subject of state activity; state power must entrust the troops with the production of further experiments in the action of shooting, as well as lightning rods and electric bells raised on tethered balloons and on kite apparatus <2> into the upper layers of the atmosphere. These experiments must be carried out over vast areas, according to a specific plan developed by scientists and changed as new data accumulates from experience; only through such experiments, the production of which in nature itself and over vast areas is possible only through troops, can the very question of how shooting actually acts on clouds be resolved, whether it produces air vibrations and, through these vibrations, softens the electrical discharges, which are credited with an important role in the formation of hail, causing hail-bearing clouds to pour down rain and be deposited with snow through such softening of electrical discharges, or does shooting act in some other way?! V. R-kov in his article “The Fight Against Hail” asserts that the production of such experiments through troops cannot cause damage to their direct activities, and the article “The First Russian Hail Mortar”, speaking about the fact that the history of hail-fighting indicates several cases of injury and even death, explains this by the fact that for it was not specialists who took on the matter, and expresses the hope that nothing of the sort will happen when specialists, i.e. military artillerymen, take on the matter.

Thus, everything that has to be added to the article "Disarmament" leads to the recognition of the necessity of turning weapons into instruments of salvation, of turning the forces acting with weapons, i.e. troops, into a force for natural testing, of turning all peoples into a force for natural testing through compulsory military service; which will be achieved when compulsory military service is combined with compulsory education, but education combined with the expansion of knowledge itself; such education will lead to the fulfillment of a universally obligatory duty, a universally obligatory service, which passes from the defense of the fatherland against one's own kind, as it is now, to defense against the blind forces of nature, to the management of the mind of all rational beings, to the regulation of the blind, irrational force of nature. At the same time, the division into two minds, theoretical and practical, and into two classes of learned and unlearned, will be destroyed - a division that leads to two ignorances, for the unlearned themselves admit that they are ignorant people, and the learned themselves do not admit that their knowledge is objective, i.e., having real reliability, the learned themselves admit that their knowledge is only subjective and even assert that man is not capable of any knowledge except subjective, i.e., unreliable, therefore worthless, not dispelling the darkness around us, that man is doomed, therefore, to eternal, hopeless darkness of ignorance. Thus, the difference between the learned and the unlearned lies only in the fact that the unlearned believe in the possibility of knowledge for man, although they do not have it, and the learned have come to the complete conviction that knowledge is impossible for man. With the abolition of the division into two minds, the subject of knowledge for the theoretical mind becomes the subject of the matter for the practical mind, and the latter becomes as broad as the former; at present, however, the so-called “practical reason” of scientists (Kant) is limited only to the moral evaluation of the actions of people, and, moreover, of people not in their totality, but in their separateness, in which they now find themselves. Let us allow ourselves to finish our article with an excerpt from the well-known work of Nordau, “Degeneration”; on page 103 (Kiev, 1894) of this work it is said: “Humanity must seek salvation not in a return to nature, but in a rational organization of the struggle against nature, I would say in a general military service against it with the right of privileges only for cripples.” We, for our part, believe that even at the present time there will not be found a cripple who is, however, capable of living, and even more so there will not be one in the future who could not take some part in the common and salutary cause for all; the salutary organization already exists; this organization is an army, to which entire nations are turning through the introduction of compulsory military service, the entire human race is turning; it is only necessary that the army, in addition to protecting itself from its own kind, should now be charged with the duty of investigating everything that can serve to protect itself against the blind forces of nature; and this not only will not to the detriment, but by raising the consciousness of the warriors, it will also raise the combat readiness of the troops in the event of an emergency, the possibility of which will become less and less, and, finally, such an emergency will become completely impossible. Not the destruction of the army, this great force - which is impossible - but its transformation into a natural force will make war impossible. It is necessary not to throw down the sword, but to beat it into a ploughshare, not to throw down the weapon, for it can be taken up and turned against us, it is necessary to turn it from an instrument of destruction into an instrument of salvation; war is not a volitional phenomenon, and no persuasion, no matter how strong and eloquent, can destroy war. That war is not a voluntary phenomenon is most clearly and indisputably proven by the conquest of Turkestan, which was conquered not only against one's will, but also despite the most insistent prohibitions of our diplomacy and the central government, as evidenced by the first Turkestan Governor-General K. P. von Kaufman (see "K. P. von Kaufman, the organizer of the Turkestan region. Personal memoirs of N. Ostroumov").

1 It is said about hail mortars (see "Preventing hail by firing from mortars" - Government Bulletin of 1902, No. 10 and following, and the article by N. S. in the Russian Gazette of 1901, Nos. 178 and 191 "On the issue of artillery combat with hail").

2 A kite apparatus, intended only for observation, quite unexpectedly caused a thunderstorm on April 19, 1902, as reported in the April 1902 issues of the newspapers Novoye Vremya, No. 9386, and Moskovskiye Vedomosti; consequently, a kite apparatus can also be classified among the apparatuses suitable for controlling meteorological phenomena and with which the army now called Christ-loving should be armed; and then it will be a truly Christ-loving army, for if a thunderstorm, which has such a close connection with atmospheric precipitation, was caused by this apparatus, then, consequently, these precipitations can also be caused; It is also impossible not to notice that the apparatus that can cause a thunderstorm is also very dangerous, threatening life, and the lives of those not only conducting experiments, and therefore cannot be left in the hands of private individuals, but can only be entrusted to troops called upon to protect the lives of others and sacrifice their own for their friends.
