The question of preserving the monuments depends on the clarification of the question of the causes of their destruction. The indifference of some, the predation of others does not yet explain the essence of this issue. Civilization, as an industrial-trading culture, decisively does not tolerate monuments: the side of the side is outraged, and Kobden even fury leads to the existence of such monuments as the pyramids. Industrial civilization, if it is true and consistent, can value the past only in the sense of disposal and exploitation of it present. She is ready not only not to erect monuments to the dead, but even to dispose of the deceased themselves for whims or the benefits of living. Some American professor bequeathed to turn his corpse to the light gas in order to serve contemporaries with two-hour burning at his expense-a cheap self-sacrifice, but in the spirit of hypocrisy of the egoistic age, which had already come up to dispose of the contents of the graves as a “fertilizer compost” for fields and gardens!

For consistent industrial civilization, there is logically there is no place for monuments. This is not from one practical point of view, but also from the principled. The German positivist, in the person of the Freiburg professor A. Richl, limits the content of knowledge “changes”. The latest science, he says, “made from the demand to justify the supreme rule of the study and gave it in the application to the outside world the exact meaning of the principle of quantitative correspondence between the cause and the consequence.” Where is here, in this science, who knows only the change, abolishing the remaining, abiding, where, from a fundamental point of view, is a place for archeology, restoring the past according to the remnants of these changes? And in practice corresponding to this theory, there will be no place for monuments. Barbarians, Scythians destroyed strangers, cherished their own; The barbarians of industrial culture do not even know this difference.

If, despite the fundamental and practical hostility or indifference to the past, this “civilization” nevertheless created paleontology and did so much in the field of archeology, if it persistently searches the monuments of the past and carefully retains and explores them, then it makes it in conflict with its utilitarian and industrial foundations; The depth of this contradiction proves that even the new -language humanism and animal -like naturalism is not able to completely exterminate in the kind of human son of human.