Hegelianism should not be called panlogism, but illogism, for Hegel's "Logic" depicts the course of an irrational force, which always puts forward theses that present themselves as absolute truths, without being them. Every thesis gives rise to an antithesis, which, in its irrationality, considers its parent, who imagines himself to be the absolute truth, to be an absolute lie, and attributes the truth exclusively to itself, in which it is exposed in turn by the moment that follows it, which it itself gives rise to. The grandson stands up for his grandfather, considering both him and his father (the antithesis) to be only half-lies. Such a position would be more logical than the preceding ones, if it did not in turn give rise to an antithesis.

[In contrast to this entire process] the true Logos is a project for the unification of rational beings in the matter of managing an irrational force and in the matter of re-creation. But we know only what we can create, as Kant rightly remarked, which, incidentally, was said long before him by Aristotle.

Hegel's student Marheinecke called his teacher "the incarnate Logos." However, Hegel himself, being a synthesis of many theses and antitheses and recognizing himself as the absolute truth, was (in due time) refuted, according to the laws of his own logic, by the materialistic antithesis generated by him, which also did not turn out to be the absolute truth, just as Hegelianism did not turn out to be a complete lie, and was reborn again, but without any claims to absolute truth.

For panlogism to become truth, for everything to be governed by thought, by reason, a universal cause is needed.

Hegel's saying, taken not from his "Logic" but from his letter, could have saved his "Logic" by transforming it from a thought about a cause into a cause. The truth expressed in the letter he grasped, as he himself says, by experience, and not speculatively: "Seek first of all food and clothing, and the kingdom of heaven will be added to you!" Understanding by food and clothing the essentials, and not wealth, we will find this essential in the prayer for the Kingdom of God next to the plea that the will of God be on earth as it is in heaven, that is, that by fulfilling the will of God we would rule the earth, and then there would be neither hunger, nor cold, nor deadly plague...

Hegel's "logic" is a metaphysical depiction of birth and death, and not of recreation and revival; it is a picture of disintegration, not of unification. If the logos-word is replaced by deed, then this will be a demand for the transition from disintegration to unification for recreation and revival, a transition "from death to life and from earth to heaven" (in the words of the Easter hymns). The beginning of "Logic", its first stage, "Being", turning into "Re-being" (into recreation), becomes the end, that is, it experiences birth and death, and the end of "Logic", the third stage or step, "Concept", turning into a "Project", becomes the beginning. The second, middle step, called "Essence", turns into "Realization", when, having cognized the very "Essence of Being", we pass from effects to causes, from phenomena to forces, from accidental existence to necessary being, from the subsequent to the previous, from sons to fathers, and the totality of the subsequent (sons), as conscious beings, relates to the unconscious force in its entirety, as a ruling force for the restoration of the previous. Besides this shift of the beginning to the end, it is necessary to place a thinking being before logic, as well as an agent before a deed, and before a common deed, the totality of all living at the expense of the dead, the totality of all rational beings conscious of the oppression of an irrational force.

In the very last phase, when the Absolute Spirit, having passed through the supposedly lower stages of art and religion, rises to the ideal emptiness of philosophy, and in it reaches the third stage of the new philosophy—the identity of substance and subject,<<1>>—in this last stage of the development of the Spirit, the identity acquired turns out to be not actual, not real, but only thought of, imaginary, turns out to be only a supposition, a project, from which the real, not imaginary work of beings, internally united, which until now had been only externally brought together, must begin.

Internal rapprochement begins in thought. What is an individual or a species in thought bears the features of the general, the generic in representation. In this subjective consciousness, nature returns from its other-being or outside-being into itself, that is, to the absolute idea.

According to Hegel, the one who possesses the ability to represent or think of oneself as a generic being is the Human Spirit. The life of this spirit is set forth in the Philosophy of the Spirit, which is considered subjective, as absolute.

[But] if the Philosophy of the Spirit were the Philosophy of the Deed, and not only knowledge, if it were the philosophy of the will, and not only thought, then, instead of the "Phenomenology of the Spirit", depicting the transition from sensory knowledge to the rational, we would have a transition from the passive to the active. Then all physiological processes, all phenomena that constitute the subject of anthropology, would become controlled by the will through rational knowledge; physiology would become subject to psychology. Then the spirit would truly rise above its subjectivity and become objective, that is, ruling the object itself.

Then the right would also become a fact. In property law, property would be the actual possession of the without knowledge, the possession of a "thing in itself", which presupposes the deepest union of rational beings, no longer in need of an external contract, necessary for (counterparties) strangers, placed only in external relations to each other, for their souls are mutually dark to them and seeing the face does not mean seeing the soul, the external conceals for them, but does not express, does not reveal the internal, so that they remain (in relation to each other) in outside-being. Obviously, the human spirit has not yet freed itself from the power of the blind force of nature, if it can be hostile or oppress others and demand punishment for itself, which, as Hegel himself sees, not only does not correct anything, but only adds another evil to one, increasing the sum of the misfortunes of the human race. Such an imperfect right requires its replacement by something else, which Hegel calls morality. But what he proposes under this name does not at all deserve such an honorable name, since this "morality" does not correct the evil committed under the dominance of legal relations. If Hegel demands real truth and real good, then the subject will only recognize himself as one with the moral substance (with the moral object), that is, the moral substance will be embodied (really and actively) in a living personality or in the unity of many, all personalities, when the state becomes a fatherland, that is, the fulfillment of a duty to fathers, dying and dead. Only when fulfilling this duty will civil society become a brotherhood of sons, and families - a union for the work of resurrection.

Such a work, of course, can be a goal (self-sufficient), an end in itself, for all the worlds of the universe, disintegrated and through this "falling", inclined to destruction, it brings into complete, harmonious unity through the labor and knowledge of all resurrected generations.

On the contrary, how can the realization of the freedom of each individual, this empty Nothing in an imaginary unity, or rather, in the emptiness of all who remain subject to an irrational force and dream only of freeing themselves from rational beings, be an absolute end in itself? Slavery and domination are undoubted evils; but freedom (taken in itself, without further definition and realization of its purpose) is not a good; it is simply nothing.

What sense can there be in history if it (as they want to convince us) is only progress in the consciousness of freedom, and not unification for that universal cause which embraces as its task and goal the whole universe, both in its parts and as a whole?..

In the East there is only domination and slavery; Greece knew only the domination of a few with the slavery of many (30,000 citizens for 400,000 slaves in Athens), Rome — the domination of one tribe over the whole world. Modern Europe boasts of freedom for all; but this freedom is also entirely imaginary, freedom in thoughts or “de jure,” and not “de facto.” The constitutional state is a mutual limitation, an obstruction that leads to inaction or to a weakening of energy, and not to its replenishment. In such a state, the unity of the Whole (community) cannot manifest itself as a living, personal force and act with the fullness of a living personality in the person of the sovereign. In the state, as a legal and economic society, and not a kinship society, not based on mutual knowledge and feeling, the Spirit is objectified as the reality not of sons, but of citizens, restrained by external force, supervision, and the threat of punishment. But it is not in such a reality that nature or the human spirit, in the sense of the instrument (will) of the God of the fathers, can find moral satisfaction! Only when the state becomes an association not external, but internal, based on mutual knowledge and mutual feeling, in short, when the state becomes a brotherhood, only then will it appear as non-resistance to the will of the Triune God, will it become a connection between people and God, “religion”, identical with knowledge, ruling the blind force, transforming it from giving birth and killing into re-creating and reviving, and with art, the art of not creating dead and corruptible likenesses, but of re-creating dead fathers to immortal life.

[But the whole course and the whole final goal of Hegel's "Phenomenology of Spirit" are opposed to this real unification of people, religion, knowledge and art in a single, all-embracing, real and self-sufficient matter:] in art for Hegel, truth appears in material (still real) forms (as in something very imperfect), in religion, as a form already higher, truth manifests itself already in abstract ideas, and only in philosophy does the human spirit finally recognize truth not in images, ideas or symbols, but "face to face", that is, precisely impersonally, imagelessly, in its fullness, that is, emptiness.

1 If substance or essence became not simply a subject, but became a son, then Logic would be transformed into Ethics: substance would then appear not as an absorption, but as a resurrection of modes.