"The Philosophy of Feeling and Faith in Its Relationship to the Rationalism of the Eighteenth Century (primarily French) and to Critical Philosophy" (primarily German) is at the same time an exposition of Germany's liberation from French influence and its acquisition of intellectual independence, which is very instructive for us. The latter, however, consists only in a new formulation, and not in a solution of the question of the relation of feeling and faith to reason and knowledge, and vice versa. Indeed, one cannot consider the question solved when, contrary to Hamann,<<*1>> neither "cogito" nor "sum" are considered either noble or acquired, and the former is replaced by "the unconscious," and the latter by "non-being"!

We knew Germany only in the age of criticism and did not know what it was before the critical period and what it had not completely lost even at that time. For some reason the critical period seems to us neither temporary nor transient. But Germany, too, was once rural and religious before it became urban and unbelieving. However, even in the city, faith and feeling were not yet completely lost; but grief over loss turned into a consciousness of mortality, and the task of reviving the dead, returning them to life, was replaced by faith in (otherworldly) immortality; at the same time, the original "God of the fathers" became the God of the living alone.

The Russian intelligentsia was more familiar with critical philosophy than with its opponent, the philosophy of feeling and faith; and therefore, although attempts were made in our country to reconcile faith with knowledge, this question has not yet been posed in its entirety. The universities became primarily organs of critical philosophy; in Germany, they enjoyed especially great influence. Prussia tried to replace the loss or insufficiency of material forces in the state (as was the case after the Peace of Tilsit) with intellectual forces in the form of universities. Even the opponent of Louis XIV, the Great Elector, dreamed of founding a university in Germany, which would become a refuge for foreign scholars persecuted for their beliefs or teachings. The first king of Prussia, Frederick I, founded a university in Halle, and Lavisse rightly says that before Prussia received a "king-sergeant," it found a king-rector. However, it cannot be said that Germany, in the person of the opponents of critical philosophy, has come to a true feeling. True feeling is filial love, which does not degenerate into a feeling of pride; whereas only in this latter form, in the form of self-exaltation, has Germany known love for the fatherland. This already distorted love found its full expression in the war with the French, whom the Germans had previously imitated so slavishly in their intellectual and external, secular life. German patriotism is aristocratic and urban; True patriotism, humble and wise, not exalting itself, is rural: it is born at the graves of ancestors; proceeding from grief over the loss of fathers, it is far from hostility towards brothers, and consequently, from exaltation over other nations. Such is the love of the homeland of the Russian people in its opposition to the arrogant, militant patriotism of the Germans, and not only the Germans.

But what the University was for Germany, for Russia (if, of course, she will delve into the question proposed to her in the very title of the book on the philosophy of feeling and faith) will be the Museum, which represents a reaction against the critical passion that turns everything into a myth, into a representation. The Museum is a collection of material evidence of what criticism has turned into an illusion or a myth. Of course, such evidence does not yet provide complete persuasiveness; but then the Museum is only an expression of feeling, and not yet an expression of living faith. Living faith is not limited to a temple connected to a museum dedicated to knowledge, closed within the confines of scientific institutions. Living and life-giving faith connects the temple-museum, the sanctuary of feeling and thought, with the extra-temple and extra-museum general work of realizing the demands of feeling and projects of thought. This faith bears witness to itself "by deeds", that is, by the results of deeds it proves the truth of thought united with feeling, and of faith that does not contradict reason.

1 Volume I. Moscow. 1897.

*1 This refers to Hamann's aphorism: "еber das edle "Cogito" das noch edlere "Sum" nicht vergessen!" [Behind the noble "Cogito" do not forget the even more noble "Sum"! (German)], placed as an epigraph to the above-mentioned book. (V.A.K.)