All the reasoning of Kant (the thinker of soulless and heartless, considering both God and people to himself) about autonomy and heteronomy are idle talk.

According to Kant's teaching, autonomous will is impossible in the causal chain of phenomena (and a number of generations are also a chain of phenomena); It is the ability to start the entire causal row in full. Consequently, autonomy exists only insofar as there is a free will, not subordinate to the law of causality of phenomena, but itself becoming a cause. (See adding 1st.)

To prove that so far a person is subordinate to the blind power of nature, that is, the law of causality, he is not free - it is completely pointless. To prove the infectity of freedom and to admit that it is not in experience, in reality, that is, that it has only an imaginary, only mental existence-whether there can be something more absurd, more so-more, empty-toher than this! [The very reference to experience here only confuses, because] Kant admits the experience only the most limited, not aggregate, not universal, [but only that] that is in the "world-laugh" history of mankind. The adherents of Kant and especially his followers in Russia need to know that the experience, as he was under Kant or what he appears in the concept of world-mining history, originated by him, is not very similar to the experience of what he had now or what he could be with, in agricultural Russia, despite the fact that the World Wash History has not yet ended, although it begins to burn out its maintenance. Kant's philosophy is precisely philosophy, thought or mind (meaning, “spirit”) of world-laughing history and experience corresponding to it. The experience of the whole life from this point of view is determined [not only by moral requirements, but even] non -economic relations; It is all depending on the technical tools (production), which create (or modify) economic life, (and this latter then creates the entire city, commercial and industrial “culture”, which forms the basis of the new, worldwide history). Could Kant even dream of the possibility of the aggregate action of the entire human race throughout the Earth, when (at that time) did not yet think about lightning rods on balloons (or on the regulation of thunderclap), when there were no snake apparatuses of such sizes that themselves could cause thunderstorms; Whereas these days they offer special guns even against earthquakes and 30 or more hours after death can again arouse life in the heart! ..

When the regulation of a thunderstorm, meteoric force will turn out to be possible, rural life will take a completely new species and the reverse course from cities in the village will cause. Then life and history from the philistine will turn into a peasant. Then there will be no “return to Kant”!

Adding 1st. Kant's reasoning about autonomy is the reasoning of the prodigal son. For the prodigal son, there is nothing and no one, and everything and all are strangers. That is why Kant cares about the preservation of his powerless autonomy. Fearing the dependence on his own, the prodigal son of the human, (as well as the philosopher, interpreting about the protection of the dignity of an independent human person) are unconditional dependence on the blind forces of nature.