After transcendental dialectics, which destroyed all hopes for salvation under the guise of humility and doomed a person to the torment of Tantalus, the dunctional affair of the practical mind should naturally follow. But Kant’s practical mind was convicted of analyzing small, personal squabbles that do not save from general death, and not a great saving business, not what human sons should, as rational and moral creatures, be taken together. Due to these squabbles, the transcendental dialectics did not become immanent, silling, did not become, in the task of saving the world through the resurrected generations, the instrument of that real living creature (God), which was turned into an ideal dialectic.

Transcendental analytics also did not become a synthetic immanent, that is, it did not become a feat, through reasonable forces to the committed or world-regulatory. << 1>>

In the same way, transcendental aesthetics did not turn the ideal of space and time into reality, that is, the abstract time did not turn into a real series of revitalized generations, and in the abstract space did not introduce all these generations to those who simultaneously save the falling worlds from death.

Criticism of a practical mind cannot be considered only a synthetic judgment that gives the predicates of good and evil, as it is impossible to call a critic of judgments, considering beauty and disgrace or judging about them. On the contrary, criticism, condemning the creation of the dead likeness and discord, allowed by the practical mind, should demand unification not to create only dead likeness, because religion, freed from the narrow borders of pure reason, undoubtedly requires resurrection, as the fulfillment of the will of the god of the “not dead, but living”. The experimental should become equal to the pre -pipe, real, empirical - equal to transcendental.

The prejudice of Kant is that the requirement of the practical mind to subjugate the world is sensual (the world, what it is) to the moral world (the world, which should become) Kant recognized as unknown. The task, of course, will not be fulfilled if it does not become the only thing that concludes everything in itself, and everyone. In order not to think about execution, it is easiest to say that it is impossible, and do trifles: Kant did so. He, like a Western person, sees the highest good in the growth (in individuality, in the personality), considering discord a necessary condition for an independent personality and freedom. (But freedom is only personal - ghostly freedom; freedom only from rational creatures is imaginary: in reality, it is only general slavery to the power of unreasonable, slavery, from which real release separately and impossible; that is why true freedom is not needed in the protection of personal dignity, but unity in general salvation).

1 That is, a world order, moral will to subordinate and knowledge of the directed.