The three provisions in which Schopenhauer, who summed up the results of the Western rationalistic philosophy, indicated where exactly the most complete truth should look for - these three provisions are the very essence of the same where the whole Western rationalistic philosophy came out with its main belief: the true essence of the world and the meaning of life are known by man inside, in itself.

To plunge into yourself, you need to alive and separation, alienation from each other, and there is not the slightest need to compound to return to yourself. Otherwise, you need the very thing that was required by the commandment of “Know yourself!”, That is, “Know only yourself!” - Where did the philosophy of Socrates and Plato come from. The other, “similar [first]” commandment: “Do not wander outside yourself, return to yourself, for in the inner person the truth!” - Where did Augustine and all medieval philosophy come from; From here - and Descartes with his "I realize - therefore, I exist!" From this “Cogito Ergo Sum”, in which only a complete reliability is attributed to personal being, it could very easily turn the outside world into a performance.

Meanwhile, the grotto is partly, and Tolstoy, apparently, completely agree that the situation: “The world, as will and as a performance” is certainly truly true. But for whom is it true? - Only for people sentenced to inaction and a secluded, cabinet life, that is, doomed only to think and wish alone alone, and not act in aggregate. Obviously, neither the grotto nor Tolstoy felt all the horror consisting in this position, which deprives us of the brothers and fathers, that is, leading to the very thing that makes death. Schopenhauer Bairon's peer showed all the horror of loneliness in God, of course one, that is, lonely (which can not relate to Christian God. Triune), when he said that he creates worlds behind the worlds to fill the emptiness of existence, and nevertheless thanks to loneliness, that is, the lack of equal creatures, destruction would be the highest good for him. This means that for someone who understood the horror of loneliness, there is no other god except the triune.

In the 2nd paragraph, the grotto agrees with Schopenhauer that there is a blind power in nature, which Schopenhauer calls the will to life. But what the grotto itself calls this power - this is silent, although in this is the main thing. If the grotto agrees with Schopenhauer regarding the meaning of this force, then he will differ from him only by the means that he will choose to get rid of life.

Of course, a person has a desire to life, and he has a common one with animals. But especially, especially in a person or son of a human, there is still a thirst for restoration of life, which blind will or strength itself destroys in the face of the fathers; A person has a specific thirst for restoration by converting blind power to the rational one - into the instrument of reason, led by a son's son ...