Every link in the rope (Nietzsche wits like a showman) is stretched from the animal to the superman; every living being, feeling pain and disgust towards itself, abolishes itself and produces the superman, who in turn repeats this painfully disgusting process. The course of blind nature, which, giving birth to sons, kills fathers, Nietzsche, in his insensibility, wants to make felt, so strongly and vividly expressed by Feuerbach, by inventing for this purpose such a progressive ladder of executions, in which each step is horror and disgust. The only benefit that can be extracted from Nietzschean chatter is the deepest disgust for an aimless existence. Does not Zarathustra express the greatest weakness of compassion (for, according to Nietzsche, compassion is weakness, and reprehensible!) when, hearing the cries of the suffering: "Put us to death! Deliver us from suffering!", he says: "You must kill yourself!?" What more, it would seem! Everything is clear enough! But our chatterbox explains the clearest thing: "You must voluntarily withdraw yourself from life." If the life of the superman consists in experiencing the greatest suffering and disgust, then it is not enough for him to endure and bear the painful and disgusting, but he must still increase it: cause suffering, inflict wounds, enjoy the sight and stench of them. The superman enters hospitals and wanders through battlefields in order to test the extent of his insensibility and "laugh" at the sight of increasing suffering. "Woe to those who laugh!" says the Old Testament. For the "Wise" (in the spirit of Nietzsche) "divine laughter" is needed. Not with a heavy tread, but "with a dashing dance", "like a whirlwind before a storm", "the superman rushes over the swamp of heavy melancholy" ... "It is necessary," Nietzsche exclaims, "it is necessary to dance, to laugh out of oneself; it is necessary to rise up on the wings of dance and laughter, that is, to surpass this abomination"!.. The picture of a laughing and dancing superman, rushing over everything where there is grief and suffering, and sending down new torments to those already suffering, is an ominously effective picture, but it is also stolen: remember Tertullian's laughter when depicting the Judgment, the destruction of the world and the torments of hell!..

The solution to Nietzscheanism is the simplest. Nietzsche does not at all know that the human race is approaching adulthood. He, like a child, and, of course, a very spoiled one, knows only play, and cannot imagine anything higher than play. He wrote about the origin of Greek tragedy when the Franco-German tragedy was being played out; even having freed himself from the aesthetics of Schopenhauer and Wagner (his last work was “Nietsche contra Wagner”), he still did not understand the approach of adulthood. Only with such a view can one explain the doctrine of infinite returns. If one looks at life as a game, and the world as a theatrical spectacle, one can understand this most absurd absurdity, understand the desire “for everything to be repeated exactly as it is, for ever” (however bad it may be!), that is, in its most imperfect form. Nietzsche not only reconciles himself to what has been, but also insatiably cries out: “da capo!” or "bis!", demanding endless repetitions and having in mind not only himself, but the whole world comedy, and not only this "performance" in itself, but mainly even the one who needs this performance and who makes it necessary... But who is this? Who, if not "circulus vitiosus - Deus ?!",<<*1>> - the divine vicious circle or simply - immaturity, which consists precisely in the creation and repetition of likenesses, games, toys and amusements! God here (that is, the blind elemental force) is the author of the play and the director of the drama repeated millions of times; people are its puppets!.. Nietzsche never left the realm of aesthetics for minors: "Zarathushtra" is also a work on the origin and repetition of the tragedy or comedy of the world. It remains to ask: what is the first condition necessary for the admission of all this unreasonableness, all this madness? There can be only one answer: the absence of reason, which is what the author was punished with.

*1 The vicious circle of God (lat.).