Nietzsche is a philosopher of the era of complete degeneration, the beginning of which was the philosophy that placed the rule “know yourself” at the “head of the corner” of wisdom, that is, “know only yourself!” The last philosopher shows us the last people, exhausted by non-action, and the very last man, who (despite all his fall) is not capable of despising himself.

“Thus Spake Zarathustra”... It would be necessary to add: the teacher of the eternal return of life, and with it, of death; but a return that is not conscious, but only assumed and not tangibly proven. Meanwhile, as soon as this assumption was proven, felt and realized, this endless repetition would turn into one continuous (without death) existence, and there would be no “sunset,” and this entire poem, now hideously evil, now vulgarly buffoonish, would turn into a majestic Easter Song, and at the same time into a project for the conversion, through collective labor, of the power that kills into something that revives, that recreates.

Why was this preaching of eternal return necessary? The discovery and dissemination of this thought can neither stop, nor weaken suffering, nor console in it; it was needed only for intimidation, for Nietzsche, as a superman, was alien to everything human. But to an uncorrupted man, to the son of man, the preaching of regulation, of the management of nature by the power itself returned to being, would be understandable. But the superman does not think and feel like a human being and therefore does not need to communicate with people: having felt himself a superman, he retreats to the mountains and surrounds himself with animals instead of disciples. Having spent only ten years in the desert, he, filled with arrogance, decides to “condescend, to descend” to people, goes to preach in the city about what should not be done, but only thought for the return, because the destruction that consists in “endless returns” cannot be called a deed! He is irritated by the fact that his listeners, the city dwellers, have only toys on their minds, which they do not want to exchange for his game of thoughts. But he is angry with them completely in vain, when he himself is only trying to replace one game with another. Having met a God-loving misanthrope who had not yet heard that the gods were dead, and having entered into communication with him out of hypocritical love for mankind, he himself forgot that God and the God-man were alive, Who was not comparable to the “superman,” worthy of being called not eber, but Untermensch.<<*1>>

Having a corpse in his hands, he buried it, but only because he himself was dead. He saw a child, but did not understand why it was necessary to “be like children.” He understood the difference between camels and lions, understood slavery and domination, but did not comprehend kinship (fatherhood, sonship, and brotherhood). The self-proclaimed teacher of humanity, Zarathustra despises man, but does not know the son of man, nor the daughter of man, and does not understand their infinite superiority over the German “ober-man,” superiority because in them birth has become resurrection. You boast of your "superman" (we could tell him), but they prefer the last man. You are right when you despise reason that does not translate into action, and virtue that is powerless against death. Here you are right, because this is truly the source of our misfortunes. Our whole present (so put) life is poverty, filth and petty pleasure. Not only poverty is misfortune: wealth and poverty are two misfortunes; both are misfortune! But even in their equalization and negation there is still no happiness, but there is, perhaps, only a third misfortune. <<*2>> You proudly point out to ordinary sufferers your "supermen" who are supposedly so different from them; but they will answer you, and fairly: "We have seen, we know them, these non-commissioned men; they, like us, have not conquered death, and in this they are similar to everyone else; in this enormous similarity in the main thing they take their small dissimilarity for superiority and shout loudly about it", but that's all!

And is there any sincerity in your tragic sermon? If you love destruction so much, why don't you yourself hurry to perish and even prove yourself unworthy of punishment? You are brave only where there is no danger; when so many have abandoned Christ without you, you bravely extol the Antichrist!

For a sober person there is nothing great or beautiful in "Zarathushtra". Only a drunken man could imagine that he was riding on symbols to the summit of truth; intoxication transports him to "another" world, where all things (of course, "things in themselves"!) joyfully respond to his speech, caress him, want to "sit on his back" ... Here the essence of things is revealed; here their will is expressed; here every being wants to become a word: every creativity wants to learn from it... But all this, of course, only seems: the intoxication has passed... and everything has disappeared!

This is extremely reminiscent of folk tales about how a goblin leads a lost person through the forest and what miracles are seen at the same time; and if you cross yourself, you will see yourself in a swamp and in the mud...

*1 Not "above", but "below-man" (German).

2 For one equation of false goods and their denial in itself does not yet create true good; to limit oneself to one denial means to hinder creation, that is, to multiply misfortune, to create a "third" misfortune (V.A.K.).
