"In Hegel," says Soloviev, "being itself tries to become philosophy, to transform itself into pure thinking," into knowledge of being, into knowledge: why being exists. This is equivalent to the transformation of being (real) into the thinkable or imaginary.

Hegel is the most sincere, highest and last philosopher, a thinker par excellence, truly - precisely a thinker. There is nowhere further to go in the realm of abstract, all-consuming thinking, idealization of the real. After him, thought must [either freeze or] pass into action; thinkers must be replaced by doers, and the "great" in the realm of thought (in philosophy) will be "minor" in the realm of action.

The transition of being into the thinkable, into the imaginary means the transition into non-being; whereas in the realm of the matter the already non-existent, having become merely thinkable, merely imaginable, must again become existing.

For Hegel, all philosophy turns into logic, into thought about thought. For him, God himself is not the Creator, but only a “philosophizing mind,” as Soloviev notes.

It is surprising that Soloviev, who so accurately defined this essential feature in Hegel, did not himself understand that the role of philosophy has been played out, finished, that [henceforth] it is a dying phenomenon, the end of humanity’s immaturity! Between the Thinkable [only] and the [already] Existing, as well as between the Subjective and the Objective [henceforth] the Projective must be placed.

Hegel's "logic" is illogical because it is precisely a movement into the Unknown without any assumption about what will come out of this movement, which (for some reason) is accepted as the truth of everything that has gone before.

All the riches acquired on the long path [of human life], extracted from the experience of the entire world-philistine history, [all these riches,] reduced to an abstract form, turn out to be imaginary.

The Universal Spirit, embodied in the German professor Schelling in a form of contemplation alien to this spirit, insufficiently abstract, but very arbitrary, finally reached in Hegel the form of the most abstract emptiness, the dialectical healing [? redemption?], which is inseparably inherent in philosophy. This final point must become our starting point. Philosophy, according to Hegel, is the same religion, but in the form of thought, only not in the highest, but in the lowest, while religion, in his expression, is the same philosophy in the form of representation, and art is the same religion in the form of artistic expression, which, of course, is true, but true only in German. But if we place before Logic, instead of a thinker, an agent, but not an individual, but in the form of a collection of all rational beings, then philosophy in its highest form of thought will be only subjective, not identical with substance. And in order to become identical with substance from subjective, it must control substance. Then religion will become not a representation, but a project for controlling nature, that is, a generative force for the return of life. Art, having become an instrument of religions, will pass from the creation of dead likenesses to real recreation and revival. If Hegel's "Logic" is the voice or thought of the learned class, doomed to contemplation or thinking and condemned to inaction, then it will be an image of God not the Creator, but of God as He supposedly was before the creation of the world and the finite, limited spirit, i.e., more accurately, of the spirit before its manifestation in the world. And it would be even more accurate to say that Hegel's "Logic" is not an image of God, but a reflection of blind nature. It will also be clear that it releases nature from itself (from reason) to its will, that is, it allows it to turn into a blind, irrational force, giving birth in order to kill, it allows it to become not a rational being, but an other-being without reason.