(On the Question of Richlianism)

The doctrine of value consists of three parts: 1) value in general; 2) value in the objective world (aesthetics); and 3) value in the world of subjects, what value should be (ethics).

In the Present, life would be the most valuable if death did not deprive it of all value. Therefore, life restored by labor, and therefore, life already immortal, is the highest value.

Not only in political economy, but also in the science of the whole world of the human race, value is the product of labor. As soon as we recognize that only action, only creativity (and moreover, reality, and not only its simulacrum), only labor (the aggregate of all) creates value, then the “estate of knowledge” (estate of scientists), if it does not become active, will lose all value, as will theoretical reason itself, if it does not entirely pass into action.

If philosophy is defined as the science of questions (problems), then all questions can be combined into one question: about death and life, which, abstractly, can be expressed by the question of being and non-being. The complete solution to the question of life and death can only be the return of life - a solution that is not only theoretical, but also practical. At the same time, the return or recreation of life by the combined forces of all the abilities of all people points to the Creator of life, having destroyed which we must recognize its recreation as our duty, our obligation. The question of death and life will be: 1) in knowledge - history and astronomy, that is, the science of deceased generations and of the killing force that has its cause in the division of the heavenly worlds; 2) in school it will be geography and history; 3) in critical philosophy - it will be the theory of knowledge (gnoseology) or the question of being and non-being; 4) in “Ptolemaic” art (in the world of likenesses) the question of life and death will be expressed by the architecture of the temple, depicting both the earth, giving way to the sounds of funeral services (singing and music) and exorcisms (commemoration) of its dead, and heaven, inhabited by resurrected generations; 5) in “Copernican” art this likeness will already become reality; 6) in peaceful imperialism the question of death and life will be the work of the Autocrat, placed by the God of the fathers “in the place of the forefather”, uniting all the sons against the deadly force in order to turn it into a life-giving force for the resurrection of the dead; and 7) finally, in religion the same question will be faith, that is, the implementation by the sons of the dead fathers of the will of the God of the fathers, the God not of the dead, but of the living. The question of death and life, which in theoretical or critical philosophy has become the question of non-being and being, will become in the philosophy of feeling the question not of why the being exists, but of why the living dies, and the dying does not come to life?

In the philosophy of will, the same question will be a demand for a decision on what to do: to kill or to revive, to be the will to resurrection or the will to kill?

Gnoseology or the theory of knowledge is a negative science, that is, criticism; it rejects the objective significance of our knowledge and recognizes only its subjective origin. Thus, gnoseology explains the essence and origin of knowledge, reducing it to the personal, conditional, changeable, unstable. Obviously, this is a transitional science to the science of deeds, to the “word about deeds” (ergonology), to the theory of deeds; this is the transition from “potential” to “faciency”. The result of gnoseology is agnosticism. Knowledge, from its point of view, is limited by phenomenalism or relativism; this knowledge is imaginary, not real. Rationalistic realism will only be real knowledge when it turns metaphysical possession of the nature of things into reality.

But for this, regulation of nature is necessary, in other words, the improvement of nature, for nature in the imperfect form in which, due to human ignorance and immorality, it still remains, cannot, in the strict sense, even be recognized as the work of God, for in it the plans of the Creator are partly not yet fulfilled, and partly even distorted; and in this state, nature, the force that blindly gives birth and just as unconsciously kills, has no value, although it can acquire it with a different attitude of man towards it, with an attitude consistent with the will of the Creator, who did not create evil and death.

If panlogism, pantheism and panestheticism represent only a mental transference of one of our properties to the external world, then the real existence of these properties in the latter cannot be recognized. A real transference is needed, that is, a deed. We can reject panphysiism and recognize panpsychism only when, having united all the sciences in astronomy on the one hand and in history on the other, we turn blind force by regulating the heavenly worlds through resurrected generations into one controlled by reason (panlogism), feeling (panestheticism) and will (panvoluntarism).