How to turn a weapon of destruction into a weapon of salvation

Our people explain the lack of water and snow in 1897 as punishment for our sins. The intelligentsia regards this view of the people as a prejudice, a superstition. But is it really just a superstition, and is there not a connection between wars, these international sins, and meteoric pogroms, such as the terrible drought of 1891 and the downpours of 1897 — is there not a connection between the torrential rains that prevented the Turks from pursuing the retreating Greeks, and the artillery fire from sometimes four hundred guns at once? And is there not a connection between these rains, which apparently began over the theater of war, and our lack of rain? Was it not the Greco-Turkish War of 1897, which took place in a country with an unusually long coastline and with peculiarities in horizontal and vertical outlines peculiar only to that country, that gave impetus to the floods which began to spread northwards to Turkey, Austria, etc.; and did not the floods there cause the rainlessness and lack of water in our country? In 1891 Russia was deprived of grain, and in 1897 even of water; “The Volga is one huge waterless rapid,” they wrote in the newspapers; water communications ceased, the Ministry of Railways was powerless to counteract the disunity which resulted; and science indifferently noted only an increase in some places, and a decrease in others, of precipitation, without even asking the question of the connection between these phenomena and the cannonade which took place during the war. Meanwhile, this question is far from new - it was raised in 1891 on the occasion of the then famine from drought and the American experiment in causing rain; and even earlier, Powers' book was published, which collected all the cases of battles accompanied by thunderstorms and rains since the introduction of firearms. In 1891, this question was debated in various learned societies, a lot was written on this issue, and yet - in the end - unresolved, it was filed away, consigned to oblivion. Thus, in 1891, at a meeting of the Odessa Technical Society, one of its members made a report "on experiments in causing artificial rain in America", and this report "was followed by debates of a pessimistic nature about the advisability of such attempts to act against drought." But by such an attitude to the matter of deliverance from hunger, the learned technicians have condemned themselves, they have testified to themselves that there are no means of overcoming their indifference, their lack of understanding of the people's needs, if at a time when bare, unsown fields began almost from Odessa itself, precisely because of the lack of rain, the technicians limited themselves to criticizing the American method of watering... They rejected the given experience in a word, whereas even the failure of the experiment would only testify to the inexpediency of one means and would require its replacement by another, and should have forced, due to the very situation in which we found ourselves then, and continue to remain now, ever newer attempts. The Society of Technicians, which even in the terrible year of 1891 did not turn in its entirety into a commission for finding methods of action against droughts and downpours, has proven that it is alien to both its land and its people, alien in general to the agriculture of all countries; Meanwhile, a natural, universal crisis is coming, expressed in the disorder of the meteoric mechanism, so that it is necessary to turn into work what has hitherto been done by itself without any particular harm. Consequently, a new technique is required. The meeting of the Odessa Technical Society, at which the experiment of causing rain was condemned, may become fatal for the old technique, the daughter of leisure, and not of necessity, of artificial, and not of urgent needs. The experiment of causing rain was condemned by the old technique, even in spite of the fact that the rain was called artificial, a name which, it would seem, should have made this experiment accessible to the understanding even of technicians. The new technique will not be artificial, not urban, for only city dwellers can call rain artificial, caused by the conscious action of man, and see some kind of violence, a violation of order in conscious action. The experiments carried out in America, being artificial, should have become the starting point for the introduction of regulation, i.e. for bringing order into disorder, harmony into blind chaos, if, of course, we look at these experiments not as a private matter of individual farmers, but as a common, or rather, universal matter, as a natural matter both morally and physically, for there is nothing more unnatural for a rational being than to submit to blind force. The regulation of atmospheric phenomena is an attempt at natural action, a common action, the replacement of a blind process by a conscious one. Science remains indifferent to the question of regulation by atmospheric phenomena to this day; 1897 did not prompt it to this question either, although the shallowing of rivers that year, their transformation into waterless riffles, made the question of regulation not only a national question, but a universal human question. To resolve this issue, science did not bother to collect information on the number of shells fired during the entire Greco-Turkish War from both sides, although it did this is possible even now - science has not collected information about the weather during the aforementioned war, and it will hardly be possible to do this at the present time, because meteorological observations are not made on the battlefield, nor are they made in peacetime during artillery exercises and maneuvers. <1> Meanwhile, if the Greco-Turkish war gave impetus to floods in some countries, and droughts in others, in that case it brought more harm to Russia and other countries than to Greece itself... It would, however, be too superficial to see the cause, the blame for the natural disasters of 1897-1898 in international politics, which allowed the Greco-Turkish clash and, in general, the state of the Eastern question in which it now finds itself; the guilt lies in the whole civilization and culture, in the life of each for himself, as the ultimate goal of existence, and duties and common service are allowed only as an inevitable evil, while the common paternal or filial business is completely ignored, they do not know it and do not want to know it, fearing to lose freedom, enchanting diversity, while true freedom, and not discord (or the right to ignore the existence of others), the true fullness of life will be precisely in the common paternal business ... Anhydrous would not have taken such proportions if it had not found favorable conditions in deforestation and depletion of the earth, i.e. precisely in what is produced by civilization, exploitation or, in general, the life of each for himself alone. At the present time, when in many places steam power has already been replaced by electrical energy supplied by falling waters, when even here in Russia a project has appeared to supply Petersburg with electrical power on the one hand from Lake Saimaa, where waters from a considerable part of Finland are collected, and on the other from the Narva Falls, through which waters flow from the entire Pskov-Chud basin, it will not be long before the Alps with their waterfalls for Western Europe, the Caucasus for the East, the Pamirs and Tibet for Asia, Abyssinia for Africa, will become sources of power that will replace steam power; and then not only agriculture, as at present, but also industry and communications will require regulation by the meteoric process, for the force of the fall depends on the amount of precipitation, and only with regulation, with control of the meteoric process will it be constant, but during downpours this force will be harmful, will act destructively, and during a lack of rain work in factories and traffic on the railways will stop. Then Western Europe will be forced to deal with the question, which has not yet been opened, of the regulation (control) of atmospheric phenomena. But will Russia really wait for instructions from the West in this case? For Russia, as an agricultural country, meteoric regulation has always been a crying necessity; but our intelligentsia, incapable of independent thought, since the forties, and especially since the sixties, has been busy saving Russia from a proletariat that did not exist in it at that time, and was very distressed not to find such poverty as it would like to see in its dear fatherland. Meanwhile, meteorological regulation is not a dream, not a fantasy, but a matter that, if undertaken, our intelligentsia would not only prevent the proletariat from entering Russia, but would also show other countries where the proletariat existed in the forties the path, the means of getting rid of it, and this without any violence or bloodshed. As proof that causing at least rain and eliminating frequent rainfall is not a dream, but a real, actual matter, we will refer to such a well-known scientist as Mendeleyev, according to whom "there is no impossibility in causing rain with the help of explosions produced at a certain height in the atmosphere"; Only Mendeleyev finds that “this subject, like all phenomena of rain formation, still requires many scientific works aimed at subduing the forces acting here for the service of humanity.” Another scientist, not so well known, but obviously attentively studying the question of causing rain by means of explosives, A. Starkov, editor of the “Notes of the Odessa branch of the Imperial Russian Technical Society,” a member of this and many other Russian and foreign scientific societies, on whose testimony one can therefore also rely, in two of his works, published back in 1892 in Odessa, under the title a) “Is it possible to cause rain artificially?” and b) “Experiments in Provoking Artificial Rain in America,” comes to the conclusion that “there is nothing impossible, supernatural, or beyond human powers in posing the question of the possibility of artificially causing rain”… “The question of artificially causing rain,” says Starkov, “is one of the most essential questions of modern science and technology. It is so bold and grandiose in its idea, so important in its consequences, that at first it seems as if it is completely inaccessible, as if it goes beyond the limits of human means. Many deny it only when they are amazed by the boldness and grandeur of the idea itself. But in science and technology this should not take place. On the contrary, the more difficult and important the task, the more efforts should be directed towards its solution" ("Is it possible to cause rain?"). It is difficult to even approximately imagine what enormous results the discovery of a means of distributing (according to a general plan?) the moisture stored in the atmosphere can yield, - says Starkov in another of his above-mentioned works, - because, having such a means, we will have the opportunity "not only to regulate our agriculture, but also to forever avoid crop failures." "We have quite enough moisture, but it is often distributed not only to the detriment of the farmer, but even directly to his detriment. When rain is needed, we wait for it impatiently. But then the time comes when the farmer needs a bucket, and then suddenly the rain pours down, as if from a bucket." In examining the arguments that the American experiments in causing rain allegedly did not lead to any results, Starkov asks: “But did these experiments prove the opposite, i.e. establish the impossibility of causing artificial rain, do they force us to put aside all hope in this direction? Not at all! On the contrary, all eyewitnesses and non-eyewitnesses, scientists and laymen in their articles of the most diverse nature agree on only one thing, that these experiments did not prove the futility of striving for a favorable solution to the problem and rather give hope for the possibility of causing rain artificially.” “The American experiments in causing rain have given a serious impetus. Let us hope that it will cause new and persistent research into the question, which is of fascinating interest and enormous importance. On the one hand, a favorable solution will be the greatest achievement of modern science and technology, and on the other, such a solution will create an extremely important and useful revolution in the economic life of the modern farmer, and with him, of the whole society.” Mr. Starkov also says that public opinion in America is so excited by the experiments carried out there that "timid attempts to ask Congress for some ten thousand dollars for this matter are now growing into persistent demands for millions for further research into the question." "Probably," Starkov hopes, "these millions, under the pressure of inflamed public opinion, will be given by Congress and the whole business of causing artificial rain will be put on the broadest footing" ... However, these hopes of Mr. Starkov have not yet been realized - not only about millions, there has been no news of appropriating more modest sums for research into the question of causing rain. We will allow ourselves to note that with the proper formulation of this matter, not only will no millions be required, but they will most likely be a hindrance to the matter (since all sorts of abuses are inseparably connected with millions), if the question of causing rain is understood as the regulation of the meteoric process, as the control of the forces of nature. Experiments in causing rain artificially, or rather through rational human action, have in mind only one aspect of the question of regulation by the meteoric process, regulation in the full sense has in mind the elimination of droughts in some places and destructive downpours in other places and cannot be limited to any one, even a vast area - regulation is always and everywhere necessary and is not something artificial, it is as natural as reason is natural; on the contrary, a blind process is unnatural in the presence of reason, for it testifies to the inactivity of reason ... The force acting in the meteoric process is blind, unless we confuse it with God, who created both the blind force and the reason intended to control it; but the human race, bearing within itself reason, instead of managing blind force, which is imposed upon it as an obligation by the divine commandment given at creation, and which requires common human labor, replaces obligatory labor with prayer alone, and meanwhile labor can only begin with prayer, common prayer must only accompany common labor. Prayer for daily bread does not eliminate the necessity of sowing, cultivating the land, - it cannot eliminate the necessity of managing (regulating) the meteoric process, meteoric phenomena, on which much rain and no rain depend; prayer to God for daily bread, accompanied by the labor of managing the blind force of nature, is the work of God, accomplished through man; in this will be the fulfillment of the prayer "Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven," the prayer "Thy kingdom come," "Hallowed be Thy name"...

The method of causing rain, as based on data collected on the battlefield, can be tested properly, properly verified only through the mediation of troops, and this without any millions, without any special expenses for such tests, it is only necessary for the government to impose the duty of artillery teams, and in general troops, mounted and foot, armed with fire combat, to conduct meteorological observations, both in wartime and in peacetime - during exercises and maneuvers - before shooting, during and after after shooting, i.e. it is only necessary to turn artillery into a means of research, and gunners and, in general, troops - into researchers of the effect of explosives on atmospheric phenomena, which in no case will reduce their fighting strength in the event of an emergency, which, however, will even become impossible if the research is successful, i.e. if it turns out that explosives really can be a means of controlling atmospheric phenomena. Only in this way, i.e. through troops, is it possible to resolve what effect artillery fire, shooting and, in general, explosives have on atmospheric phenomena - do they disperse clouds, as some think, or cause rain? .. It is possible, even certain, that in different cases the effect will be different; It is possible that the difference in action will be explained by the number of shells fired, the state of the atmosphere, the conditions of the terrain, etc., and if the different effects of shooting find their explanation in these circumstances, then shooting would provide accurate experience, active experience, determined by number, measure, weight, instead of the current passive, almost meaningless meteorological observations. But the most important thing in this case will be the conversion of military affairs into research, into the study of nature, and in turning the army to such study its new purpose will be expressed; this will be the beginning of the transformation, or transition from an unnatural action in a moral, i.e., kinship, brotherly relationship - from fighting with one's own kind - to a natural, rational action on the blind, irrational forces of nature that strike us with droughts, floods, earthquakes and all sorts of other disasters, to an action on blind forces that place us, rational beings, in an unnatural dependence on them. If a fire battle, i.e. artillery and hand fire, were not strong enough to produce a rarefaction of the air, i.e. a decrease in air pressure, and thereby change the direction of air currents, or winds <2>—and this is the only way that real regulation is possible—in that case one could add to it the method known (from the foundation of the Kharkov University and the establishment of the Ministry of Public Education) of V. N. Karazin, which consists of raising a lightning rod into the upper layers of the atmosphere, on a tethered balloon, in order to extract thunderstorm force from there, which cannot but affect the movement of clouds, and consequently can indicate a method for controlling the movement of heavenly clouds. The possibility of such an action is recognized, among other things, by Baudouin and Lodge; the latter believes that there is nothing impossible in the hope of controlling the electrical tension of the atmosphere, and consequently the weather (Science and Life, No. 15 and 16, 1894, “On the Question of the Karazin Monument”). Experiments with this weapon will not require any special expenses, if they are imposed on the army, for the balloon, if not yet fully developed, is already becoming a military weapon.

And not only the study of the influence of explosives on atmospheric phenomena, even with the addition of action by means of the weapon proposed by Karazin eighty-five years ago, but also everything that is applied to military affairs can be tested through the army not only as a means useful in war, but also as a means of regulating and managing natural phenomena; and since absolutely everything that is invented is applied to military affairs: not a single discovery, not a single invention, no matter in what field it is made, remains without attempts to apply it to military affairs, one can hope that the question of regulation by natural forces will finally be resolved, if it is resolvable at all; it cannot be insoluble until man has completely degenerated, until he has fallen into complete despair, cowardice, indifference, callousness, into Buddhism, whether it is Eastern or, even worse, Western. This question will be insoluble then, if man forever remains with the current knowledge, which either does not turn into action at all, or if it does, then into action that produces destruction, like everything invented for war, mutual extermination, or into toy action, like manufacturing and factory production.

The conversion of military affairs into the study of atmospheric phenomena resolves, among other things, the question of whether military maneuvers are useful and necessary?! Short-sighted lovers of peace and haters of the army, these Pharisees like Suttner (who do not ask and do not want to know the question: what is better - to throw away arms or to use them for salvation from common disasters for all), will, of course, cry out against these allegedly military amusements and games; but meanwhile maneuvers, if meteorological observations are made during them, will turn into experiments by which the question of the influence of explosives on meteoric processes can be solved or, at least, significantly investigated. And therefore it is desirable that maneuvers be carried out as much as possible and, moreover, simultaneously in different places and by agreement, the best, of all states...

Of course, to resolve the question of the possibility of controlling the forces of nature, one Russian army is not enough, even with the complete conversion of the entire people into an army. But if in Russia all military means were simultaneously converted into means of investigating the question of regulating meteorological processes, which Russia can do alone, without any agreement with others, then all other states would have to do the same; the introduction of such a dual use of weapons and everything with which armies are supplied, facilitating real pacification, would be achieved as easily as disarmament is difficult and downright impossible, under present circumstances. To turn arms and troops to salvation from lack of rain and much rain, from droughts and downpours, to salvation from crop failures, i.e. from famine, this would mean not only making the army Christ-loving in the true sense of the word (as it is called even now, of course, because it is intended to serve as a defense for the weak and oppressed from the strong), but also to give a truly fraternal outcome to the accumulated enormous forces and all kinds of combustible materials instead of what all this is preparing for, i.e. instead of war, which has not ceased to threaten for many years now and which is inevitable if people do not finally understand what their common cause is and do not use for this cause all these means prepared by them and increased against each other every day.

Does not the high cost of maintaining military forces oblige states to seek means to extract the greatest benefit from this very expensive means of defense? In the article by S. Ch-t-v, in No. 91 of the "Russk. Invalid" for 1896, the conviction is expressed that even now the expenses for the maintenance of our army are recouped not only by its defense of the throne and the fatherland, but also by its selflessness in times of national disaster in peacetime; how many times will the value of the army's peaceful activity increase if it is turned into an instrument of salvation from hunger; and also, in all probability, from epidemic diseases, pestilences, as they are called, because they are spread, one must suppose, by air currents?!..

At least, the fear of war and the hope of deliverance from epidemic diseases will not draw the attention of the intelligentsia to the great significance of the army indicated here, since hunger turns out to be completely incomprehensible to the intelligentsia, while war and diseases, from which neither technicians, nor cashiers, nor feuilletonists, etc., the heroes of our time, are free, will probably be more understandable to them, and concern for deliverance from these disasters will not seem to them either Manilovism or sentimentality, as one feuilletonist saw in American experiments in calling up rain.

Pettiness and vulgarity are the distinctive features of our positive-manufacturing age; only a new Gogol has not yet been born to denounce the vulgarity of the European and especially American 19th century. This vulgarity and stinginess, the absence of true grandeur, were reflected also in the American attempts to make rain; and these attempts proved beyond doubt only that the Americans are unworthy of the great task of saving the human race from hunger - which, incidentally, they apparently did not even think about, thinking only of profit; so that it is even desirable that such private, local experiments as the Americans should not succeed, for how much evil American Individualism would do if rain could be made by a few explosions or shots. One must want the distribution of rain to be made dependent on the action of an army or armies, on operations carried out over vast areas, or - better yet - on the whole earth, and not on the actions of individual farmers. To take the privilege of producing artificial rain, as the Americans do, is not only an abuse, it is a profanation, an expression of the most extreme moral and religious decline. They wanted to be like gods, remaining in discord, as Satan suggests, instead of becoming like the Triune God in their totality; they did not want to be perfect, like God the Father, according to the word of the Savior, the Conqueror of the spirit of discord and pride. The conversion of the blind force that directs the dry and moist currents of the air into a force controlled by consciousness can only be given by the consent of all peoples, of all people. The so-called sacred alliance would be truly sacred if the monarchs who concluded it mutually pledged themselves to introduce into their armies meteorological observations and experiments with a weapon similar to that proposed by Karazin just before the conclusion of this alliance; and this would be the beginning of the conversion of weapons used for mutual extermination into a means of salvation from hunger and plagues, diseases, in their root causes. Then, perhaps, Metternich himself would not have called this alliance the word verbiage.[1]

The hellish technology that produces weapons of destruction, in order to justify its existence, wants to see in the extreme destructiveness of its weapons the strongest means against war, i.e. it wants to convince everyone of this, forgetting or hiding at the same time that an armed state, the constant expectation of war, is no better, if not worse, than war itself. This is the justification of the hellish Fists. The best exposure of this sophistry was provided by the Spanish-American War. But before one war had ended, another was already visible on the horizon, says a correspondent from Buenos Aires. So if the war season in our hemisphere is ending, then in the South it is beginning. The two strongest and richest republics of South America are “arming with feverish haste.” Although neither of these kindred states has a decisive superiority in strength and armament over the other, similar to the superiority of the United States over Spain, they nevertheless do not want to know about Mendeleyev’s law, according to which the desire for war is supposedly inversely proportional not to the square or the cube, but to some higher power relative to the strength of armament, i.e. the range and rate of fire of guns. Much dynamite has been expended for the peaceful purpose of laying military roads, which, however, are no worse than commercial ones, and are created for the purpose of expanding and protecting commerce. The Chileans mined mountain passes with dynamite... "The armaments of both sides are fully in line with the latest word in military science"... Contrary to logic, contrary to common sense, contrary to such glaring facts as the struggle of the United States, this so terribly armed people, with such a poorly armed enemy as Spain, Mendeleyev continues to assert that the war will cease of itself, thanks to the destructiveness of guns, and therefore nothing needs to be done. And although Mendeleyev himself admitted that explosives can cause rain, nevertheless, as far as we know, he did not advise correspondents to provide information on the state of the weather during heavy cannonades. During the entire war, in the news of battles, we did not encounter a single reference to the weather. Thus, not only the introduction of meteorological observations during maneuvers and artillery exercises, it is difficult to achieve even a mention of the weather when describing battles. True wisdom requires not to lull oneself with such or other sophistries, it requires calling upon all knowledge (an all-scientific congress) to discuss the question of the appeal of the army, i.e. now, with universal military service, of the entire armed people, to save them from hunger, moreover, without any exceptions and privileges, which will not be needed in this case. With a favorable resolution of the question of drought and rain, of the management of meteorological phenomena and, in general, the forces of nature, all the economic conditions of our social system will change profoundly, and at the same time our very views on society, on nature, on reason itself and its limits will change radically, and these changes will have the most beneficial consequences. Such a change will have a fatal effect only on those who take privileges, conclude contracts for the supply of rain, are ready to transfer speculation even to the sky, and to turn atmospheric phenomena into a subject of profiteering... When military affairs become research, then with universal military service, turning entire nations into troops, experience will acquire universality, will become ubiquitous, will be carried out according to one plan, will acquire unity and, thus, induction will be equal to deduction. When troops pass from research to action, to a common, one might say, universal cause, i.e., when the harvest will be dependent on world regulation, then not only external, international wars will become impossible, but also internal ones, both open and underground, neither tyranny nor rebellion will be conceivable. With experience brought to universality, ubiquity and complete unity, the criticism of pure, theoretical reason, the criticism of practical reason and all other criticisms will lose the significance recognized for them at the present time. The king of philosophers, Kant, as well as Comte, will be dethroned, and Russia will be freed from all foreign influence... Without this same intellectual, moral victory, Russia's material struggle will hardly be successful, whether with Germany, or England, Japan, or perhaps with all of them together, unless this struggle is prevented by turning military affairs into research, into regulation by the forces of nature. Regulation with all its consequences will not only be the deliverance of Russia from foreign influences, the return of her independence, but also the beginning of adulthood not only for Russia, but for the entire human race, which, uniting in the common cause of turning blind, deadly force into one controlled by reason, will see the ideal of its structure not in the animal organism, justifying the existence of classes, lower and higher - as until now - but in the image of the Trinity, inseparable and unmerged, which is the true model of society, a society in which unity will not be a constraint, and the independence of the individual will not be discord, which will be equally free both from the extremes of Eastern fatalism and from the extremes of Western individualism. By adopting regulation, the social question is resolved by itself, the proletariat is destroyed without any violence, and all the calamities of our time are eliminated.

As early as 1891, during the famine from drought, it was pointed out that the matter which is spoken of in this article and which would turn the army into an instrument of salvation from hunger, epidemics, from common disasters. And such a change in the use of weapons would be stronger, would have a more important significance than a change in the organs of nutrition in animals, a change in those organs on which the predatory or peaceful nature of an animal depends. With such a change in the use of weapons, war would become impossible by a necessity even stronger than physical necessity, since then the harvest, or the nutrition of the human race, would depend on the action of the troops according to a common plan, on the new use of weapons; this would make the former, old use of weapons, i.e. war, impossible. Of course, the proposed method of getting rid of war is not "current" (an expression of Count L. N. Tolstoy). It is impossible to give weapons a different use than they have now, immediately, although it would be possible to begin doing so immediately, by introducing at least meteorological observations into the troops, using Karazin's weapon, i.e., a lightning rod on a tethered balloon, as was said above. This would begin to turn the army into a natural science force, which is not impossible, and would already have been accomplished, since several years have passed since the first proposal, in 1891... Count Tolstoy wanted, of course, to instantly, by the power of one word, change humanity, to make it peaceful from war-loving... But his word was heard by the Japanese, it even reached the Chinese, but it did not eliminate the war between them. Now, when, as it turns out, even the Americans were not swayed by this eloquence, when the Americans, the most steadfast hope of the defenders of peace, began the war, it is now more than permissible to doubt the reality of the “present” method of reconciliation, which consists of only one word, no matter how strong and eloquent it may be. Desire, as it seems, has nothing to do with it; incomparably more powerful and profound reasons force people to become hostile to one another. Until the reasons that force people to quarrel and be at enmity with one another are not eliminated, nor even clarified, war cannot be abolished. Even the lovers of peace themselves argue so fiercely with the defenders of war that these arguments would immediately turn into a real war if the disputants had power (there are duels between them, of course). So that the preaching of peace itself leads only to an increase in belligerence, and the defenders of peace prove to be war-loving in the highest degree, preaching peace with enmity in their souls. Such bitterness is quite understandable, however, when using such a powerless means as words. We ourselves, who stand between the defenders of peace and the lovers of war, proposing such a method of reconciliation, in which the army, i.e., the great, mighty force, is preserved, and war becomes impossible, we ourselves are filled with bitterness and vexation against both, against the lovers of war and the defenders of peace. The lovers of peace for the sake of peace, demanding the destruction of the army, proclaiming, "Down with arms!" forget that the army is a force, that the force that is wasted in wars must be given an outlet in some equivalent substitute. To think that industry can give an outlet to these forces would be very strange. Industry will clothe, feed, water, etc., i.e. prepare for activity, but of course it cannot give complete satisfaction to man. Science and art, as they now exist, are also incapable of occupying all the powers of man.

The blindness of the lovers of peace and the advocates of war is astonishing and amazing, how they do not see before them an enemy against whom, having united, they should turn their weapons. Is it not, however, because they do not notice this enemy, because he is everywhere and always, in us and outside of us - we mean the blind force of nature - is it not because they do not notice this enemy, because not only the advocates of war, but also the lovers of peace wish to have before them as an enemy not an insensitive force, but an enemy to whom they can make their hatred and malice feel, an enemy who would feel pain and by his sufferings would give pleasure to the lovers of peace. How else to explain such a strange desire to see enemies only in each other, and in this enmity, despite constant losses, to forget about the deadly force; suffering from hunger, despite the obviousness of its causes - like droughts and rains - to blame for it people like themselves, as powerless as the accusers themselves. Of course, one cannot blame nature, because it does evil through its blindness, through the inaction of rational force, through inaction, for which we are all guilty, and not anyone individually, guilty, as having failed to fulfill the divine commandment given at the creation of man, for which we are punished ...

1 Science has not taken care of this at the present time, so that the Spanish-American War is lost for the purpose of regulation; even the newspapers did not mention what effect the cannonade had on the weather. This shows, however, that destructive weapons have not yet reached such a power that a change in the weather would occur immediately. for their action.

2 What effect on meteoric phenomena does the simplest of explosives, gunpowder, have? This is evidenced by the explosion of the Moscow Kremlin in 1812, by order of Napoleon. The Kremlin suffered very little from this explosion, since it was possible to detonate not all, but only a small number of mines, but the atmospheric phenomena accompanying the explosion were extraordinary: after the explosion, rain poured down, which doused the fire caused by the explosion, and then the temperature dropped to 23° below zero according to Reaumur, i.e. Epiphany frost set in, although this was in the first half of October, i.e. at the beginning of autumn. It is interesting that when discussing in Moscow, in various learned societies and meetings, the report of the experiment of causing rain in America, no one even mentioned the consequences of the explosion of the Moscow Kremlin in 1812. 