The last, third part of the third part of the “logic”, consisting of three steps: life, cognition and absolute idea, could be a project of what should become of what there is. If we add to the “life” to the definition of “mortal” (“mortal life”), then cognition will be the question of death and life, and the absolute idea will turn into a general matter. The first part will be the real in the sense that it is as it is, but not yet rational. Cognition indicates a way of transition from what there is, in the fact that there should be a ChTS; And the absolute idea will become precisely to this should be, a universal matter of the return of life to all the dying. At the same time, the idea, which has reached not the internal only, but also the external fullness of life, should not only not, but also cannot already in this, not mental, logical, but real and integral power, be subjected to neither the denial of the outside, nor the denial of the outside, that is, self -denial.

This is a project that could be withdrawn from the last part of the Hegelian “logic”, if the author had a deeper thought about the question not only about “life”, but also about the death and about the tasks arising from it to “cognition” and about the “absolute idea” corresponding to the last sense. But Hegel did not do this, and therefore instead of the transition from what is, to what should be from the life of the mortal to the real life of the immortal, he got a transition only from imperfect reality to an unreal, only mental ideal. In the same way, in the first part of the “logic” to being (and this, too, life and death in the form of abstract!) Not attached packages, that is, resurrection in an abstract form.

This incompleteness (in the most significant definitions and provisions) makes Hegel's “logic” by the image of the life of the obsolete, created by the representative of the estate of the thinking (but not acting). Life (correctly and morally understood) cannot dwell on this thinking, only on the idea, even if “absolute”? Not always the knowledge will remain the privilege of one workshop of "scientists"! Hegel’s “logic”, perhaps, is true, and even then only partly to the past, but she is not a decree, not the law to the future! Only by the end of Hegel’s life, new means of message appeared (and the relations of people with each other) who promise to make the action of all earthly inhabitants possible in aggregate to the Earth, like a heavenly body, in its integrity ...

The “logic” of the German professor ends with the “Absolute, and not a matter of universal, all -era, the first step towards the World Wide. As Hegel does not have an absolute business and package, the transition from death to life, so he does not have a universal universal ...