"I call (Says Nietzsche) the will of the two creatures to create a third, which is more important than my parents." Such a mixture of creating with birth shows that he wanted to see something else in marriage, more consistent with the requirements of moral. But understanding, under the will, a reasonable creative action, one cannot help but come to resurrection.

To create a third creature, you need to know yourself, and I agree with this. But having learned oneself, one must still build, create yourself, correctly, spiritually and bodily. But does Nietzsche know, this typical prodigal son, who forgot the fathers, that the correct self -contribution obliges his parents? If (as he does) to replace the will of lust, and the creation of [carnal] birth, then the marriage, of course, will be an union that forgets those from which we received life, the beginning of the discharge, isolation even from all those living, who agreed to kill themselves even (because lust is the beginning of the deaths for the born). What a miserable result! At the cost of condemning on death (oblivion), they gave us a life, at the cost of self-deathing, you can’t even create what you want, what would you want to create, and it is only possible to realize that in addition to will and desire or contrary to them, it can fatally come from the life of only parents, but from the vitality of the whole kind of human (heredity), even inhuman and non-conscious nature! Weakening in our own mind and will, we give birth to a creature that does not obey our creative desires, deprived of mind and will! Finally, we give birth to a creature not for life intended, but to death, the most act of such a birth and ourselves, parents, closer to death, for death is the transition of two creatures that merged only into the flesh of one, and not into the spirit of one, mentally and efficiently, in dying through the product!

If the marriage is the union of the mind, feelings and will that ruling spiritual and bodily departures, then the birth will be replaced by resurrection and will not lead to the allocation and isolation of some from others, but to unification of all.

Sexual sense is an expression of the body transition from growth and development to reproduction, to the creation of a creature similar to itself in all parts and particles. But what will happen if this transition, understood as a repetition of what was happening in the body? In this “repetition” we would not only reveal our origin from parents, but would also know them “in our owners”.