Kricanich is the ancestor of not only Slavophiles, but also Westerners such as Chaadaev and V. Soloviev. Its value is determined by the importance of the historical moment with which its appearance is associated.

Half of the 17th century represents a particularly important era for the continental part of the world, Russia, as for the entire West, the near, European, and far, oceanic, where the future North American states arose then, perhaps all Britain and, perhaps, Germany, in order to create the latest Carthagin against the last Rome (Russian). In the half of the XVII century, the Middle East after a brief decline, which made it possible to show the entire power of his razor in a 30-year war, which constitutes its always weakness. The Middle East raised his head again and reached the Vienna Fermopill. At the same time, a large coup was also made in the Far East: instead of Mongolian China, the Manchurian was created, to whom our workarily was approaching on one side, and on the other, Western, Oceanic. Returning to the neighboring West, we see at this time the Westphalian world, which, we can say, introduced the secularization of international law into Europe, the last conclusion of which is the Hague Conference of the World, caused by the circulator on August 12, 1898, the second quieter king, while the first, preparatory step, and the embassy sent to the Western sovereigns is the first quiet Tsar for calling for a connection against the Turks, against a new Muslim upsurge. 1672 is remarkable for this call, and not by the fact that this year Peter was born, the distorter of our relations to the West.

Other significant events coincide with this era: the correction of church-missive books, the publication ..... <<*1> the book, and on the other hand, the emergence of Crisanius’a, which visited Moscow and compiled a special “narrative about the current position of the schism in Muscovy”, and then visited Constantinople, where he was present at anathematization Protestant sects. Crisanius or Krizhanich, whom the Slavophiles can be considered the ancestor of our pseudo -Slavophilism, drew up a plan for the enslavement of Orthodoxy to papism, who found so many adherents in our gentry ...
<Not finished>

*1 not verbatible (V.A. K.).