By military service we mean national service, which, according to the original understanding of the people, is necessary for the defense of the land, i.e. the ashes of the fathers; and the ashes of the fathers, according to the peasant mind, must rise; that is why it is obligatory for everyone to defend this ashes, and not the thing, not the commodity, this decorum of decay, which in the world of intellectuals arms sons against fathers, brother against brother, and turns them into enemies squabbling for places, even for ranks and orders, into enemies covering up their enmity with worn-out humanism. By becoming defenders of the ashes of the fathers, the sons are freed from extinction (minority).

Universal military service in connection with universal education requires that military instructors be sent to the villages together with teachers and priests, who, in order to educate the population, in accordance with the current method of waging war, must erect field fortifications around cemeteries abandoned in the villages and thrown out beyond the outposts in the cities - must erect these fortifications to protect the schools-temples and museums-temples, the proper place for which is in the cemeteries, at the graves of their fathers. With compulsory education, parents will be forced for the sake of their children to leave their luxurious homes and settle around cemeteries with a temple, sanctifying both schools and museums, inseparably connected with the temple. At the same time, with the aim of converting intelligent beings, even “gray” ones, into knowing ones, each village, in addition to passive observation instruments, as a necessary accessory for museums with towers, is supplied with a lightning rod kite, and each settlement with a complex kite consisting of several connected kites, experiments with which were carried out at the 10th Congress of Naturalists and Physicians. District towns are supplied with lightning rods on carbon-hydrogen balloons; provincial towns with lightning rods on hydrogen balloons; more central, university towns are supplied with lightning rods on balloons filled with etherions or, in general, new gases, lighter than hydrogen. In the same way, populated areas are supplied with guns loaded with more or less powerful explosives for experiments and observations on their effects on atmospheric phenomena, to which experiments and observations the entire population is called upon, prepared for them in schools.

It goes without saying that such stations, set up everywhere, are not intended to make predictions, even for long periods, based on the observations made in them, and not to warn of the onset of storms or hurricanes, but to weaken them at their very inception, change their direction, in a word, to introduce regulation of the entire process of atmospheric ventilation, rainfall or water precipitation, beginning with the equatorial ring of thunderstorms to the polar lights, directed by the universal device of the Lömström apparatus in these zones.

Before the programme for the Peace Conference had yet been drawn up, according to the circular of August 12, 1898, the enemy of peace had undoubtedly succeeded in causing a rise in fanaticism among three hundred million Muslims.<1> Therefore, what is needed is not disarmament; what is needed is universal armament, combined with universal education, which will give weapons another use, capable of uniting all people in one union. Therefore, the first question posed by the Peace Circular—the maintenance or preservation of peace—can be resolved only with extraordinary efforts and only if the enemy of peace, Germany, which has entered into the closest alliance with Islam, the religion of war, and if the Emperor of Germany, who has forgotten the origin and significance of the imperial dignity (see the article “Autocracy”), having entered into an alliance with the Caliph of the Faithful, are limited on land and sea by an alliance of other states, of which, with the exception of Russia and the American States, almost all are seeking rapprochement with this enemy of peace. In order to maintain peace, Russia must, while maintaining an alliance with France against Germany, also enter into an alliance with the two Britains, not only the American but also the European, the rulers of the ocean, although of course invalid. This alliance would, on the one hand, put a limit to the expansion of the enemy of peace at sea, and on the other hand, the rapprochement of Russia with England in the Pamirs would besiege Islam, which has a friend in Germany, and would separate the nomads of Upper Asia from Western Asia and Africa. An alliance of Russia, which has become the head of the Slavs, with France, which has become the head of the Romance states of Europe, having broken up Austria and surrounded Hungary, would also besiege Germany by land and separate Islam from the sea. Although eternal peace has long been counted among the utopias, eternal war cannot be an object of faith; and it is only superstition. Germany itself is only a temporary friend of war. When Germany is inclined to peace, then, having instructors in Muslim countries, it can teach the Mohammedans the Christian use of weapons. Even Christians still use weapons in the Mohammedan and pagan manner. No matter how great the obstacles to maintaining peace, peace is not completely impossible, of course, provided that knowledge and compulsory education are combined with military affairs. And we see no reason for contrition, but even rejoice at the expansion of the possessions of the two Britains, their capture on the seas, but not on land, not in China, as before. 

We are pleased with the expansion of Russia's dominion on land; and when we enter into an alliance with them, with the British, our joy will be even greater. The occupation of the Philippines, this gigantic step of the North Americans across the Great Ocean, also made us very happy, but not only because the Americans are our friends (very unreliable, by the way), but because colonies on the Great Ocean will speed up the connection of the two oceans by canals, and a telegraph cable across the Great Ocean will finally close the telegraph ring in the belt of thunderstorms and silence. North America, having expanded its possessions over the Great Ocean, will put an end to the strife of South America and even Argentina with Chile. Together with the expansion of their possessions by the Americans or Europeans, the newly acquired lands become the subject of research, i.e. the field of knowledge also expands; the possibility of influencing atmospheric and, in general, natural phenomena opens up; the possibility of the field of influence on nature expands. This possibility will be realized, of course, only if the troops are charged with the duty of international observation by agreement at the forthcoming conference.

The only sad thing is that the area of ​​Christianity or morality is not expanding. Apart from the extinction of the natives, we see everywhere complete indifference and tolerance to war, not as a necessary defense, but to war as a religion, to war as the highest virtue, as recognized by Islam. In the Emperor of Germany, who so brazenly presents himself as a friend of Islam, this tolerance has become a terrible vice. In declaring himself a friend of the Mohammedans, offering protection to Catholics and Jews, does he not say outright that for him there is no religion? Is this not a complete denial of it? For the true successor of Emperor Frederick II, can the religions seem the same: the Christian religion of men, the Jewish religion of spoiled children, and Mohammedanism, the religion of pigs? How can such "three rings"[1] be the same?

However, the same Emperor in his speech at the banquet of the Brandenburg Provincial Diet (Nov. Vremya, 1899, No. 8230) said: "All calculations of the Peace Conference will be wrong as long as unredeemed sin reigns over humanity, as long as enmity, envy and discord exist, as long as people strive to gain advantages at the expense of their neighbors." Thus prophesies Caiaphas, the Black King. The conversion of the duty of mutual extermination into the duty of restoring life to all the dead is the atonement for sin. Recognizing the prophecy of Caiaphas as true, it is necessary not to continue the war, but to atone for the sin, i.e. to turn the army from an instrument of destruction into an instrument of salvation from hunger and plagues...

In the capital of Wilhelm II in Campo Santo, i.e. in the cemetery of his ancestors, Cornelius prophetically depicted the extermination of the human race by plague, hunger, war and death. Is it not Prussia, or the Black Tsar, that is depicted by the horseman who has been given the power to drive peace from the earth? But neither the German Emperor nor Prussia heed their prophet speaking in pictures!..

In St. Petersburg's Campo Santo, over the graves of Alexander I, II and III, it would be necessary to depict a horseman who has been given the power to return peace to the earth - a picture of the resurrection is needed instead of scenes of extermination.

The German Emperor raises the theological question of atonement. And if he says that sin is not atoned for, then of course he means that it is not atoned for on the part of men, for on the divine side, as Protestants and Catholics and Orthodox believe, atonement has already been accomplished. Consequently, it is necessary to know what must be done so that atonement is completed. If atonement from sin, as the cause of death, is understood as resurrection, as the work of resurrection, which must be accomplished through the human race, as a divine instrument, then the calculations of the Peace Conference will not be mistaken.

1 Our Tatars can be asked about this: have they heard of the new powerful friend of the padishah, who will supply them all with weapons? (Wilhelm II, of course).