Nietzsche's superhumanity was only the completion of the general desire of arts, science and life to cross beyond, to become higher than ourselves, to step over not in a simple, natural way, but in some supernatural, word, mystical.

This aspiration of the second half of the 19th century and especially the last 30 years after the Franco-Prussian war should contrast the natural, antimistic movement of the sons of human, manifested in the childhood of every person and in the childhood of the human race in the knowledge that begins with the woeful facts of the death of parents and with the adoption of a primitive person of a vertical position, guardian and active transition, marked by the transition. organism from the passive subordination of the animal to the active activity of the creature of volitional and reasonable.

Already one acceptance of this situation raises the question that originated with the person himself. But in the way or path to resolving this issue, a solution, in which everything should not be connected by a word, but in deed, nothing arbitrary should and should not be introduced: the question, inevitably and naturally arising, and only one, the only correct and natural decision, makes the solution. Life or history puts forward only one thing, truly a common cause, to which everyone is called up, although with exceptions, it is easily eliminated. This common cause is military service in the broad sense of the word, which itself will turn into universal research or knowledge, if it is combined with also universal, compulsory education. To what extent this method is simple, it is evident from the fact that even such people as M. Nordau come to it, who read: “Humanity should look for salvation not in returning to nature, but in a reasonable organization of the struggle against nature, I would say, in the general military service, with the right of benefits only for crops.” The denial of the “return to nature” is sent against Rousseau and Tolstoy, for their return would mean a return to the hunger strike, to a cold, to wolves and bears ... But the word “salvation” (in Nordau) remains uncertain. In the military service, we mean replacing the replacement of the struggle against our own rational organization of the struggle against pathogens and generally destructive, spontaneously acting forces of nature. This is the path of the human transition from minority to adulthood.