Superhumanism can be the greatest vice and the greatest virtue. It is an unconditional vice of satanic origin, when it consists in the extinction of one or more persons over itself, that is, over fathers and brothers. It becomes the highest vice, when it comes to the assignment of immortality as privileges, that is, it reaches the extinction of itself over everyone, already dead and not yet dead. Superhumanism is already in this sense (as a privileged right to immortality) is a vice and moral and mental. When the superman becomes immortal, then his former, small dissimilarity with the others will turn into a huge, endless superiority not only over all living, but also over the dead.

But superhumanism is the greatest virtue when it consists in the performance of the natural duty of reasonable creatures in their totality, in the appeal of a blind, unreasonable power of nature, spontaneously giving birth and killing, in controlled by the mind. This greatest, this unconditional virtue follows from the consciousness of an unnatural dependence, and inside and outside of himself every feeling, dependence on the strength of the blind, on which all the vices, physical and moral, vices of sexual love and unlimited hatred occur.

Superman in this sense is Supramoralism. If Nietzsche in the “morning dawn” under the good was a general resurrection, he would understand that it was, although inaccurate origin, nevertheless has a certainly unconditional. Life is good; Death is evil. The return of life living by all dead for the life of the immortal is good without evil. The recreation from the land of all the dead, the liberation of their land from the power and the submission of all lands and all worlds to resurrected generations - this is the highest task of mankind, its highest duty and together - the highest good. The consciousness that any subsequent absorbs the previous one creates for the subsequent categorical imperative to return the absorbed. The subsequent one, understood as the son of the previous one, recreates something more: recreates to the life of the father, from whom the son received life. The highest imperative (order) can only be created by higher love.