The draft of a treaty on the transformation of mutual extermination by means of compulsory education of universal military service into a religious-moral duty of restoring life to those deprived of it—this draft is a return to the old, non-secularized, natural service, with the addition of a general knowledge of the deadly force of nature.

The present military service considers only its own kind as enemies against whom it must defend; and action against blind force, if such were proposed to it, it would consider an insult.

By fatherland, however, the present military service understands the land not in the sense of the ashes of the fathers, but in the sense of the wealth in the land and on the land. Military service defends cities, factories, and retail stores, but not kremlins and cemeteries, and at the same time destroys the cities of its enemies and blasphemes in kremlins and cemeteries; for those deprived of life, he takes a monetary reward from the vanquished, as well as for material losses in war.

The relief from the burdens of military service should come not from a reduction, but from an expansion of this service to the greatest possible universality; moreover, in peacetime, people will no longer be torn away from their families or from the land, but only in their free time from agricultural work will they gather in military, battalion and regimental headquarters, which will coincide with civil-administrative institutions. Improved communication routes, necessary for this, cannot be considered unproductive expenditure.

The conference of the international or, better to say, the all-people, recognizing that military service has as its goal not only the struggle of peoples against each other, but also protection from blind force, from fire, drought, floods, epidemics, locusts, etc., sets itself the task of expanding the latter obligation at the expense of the former. For the conference, as a nationwide one, military service, i.e. duty, obligation to give strength and life, applies to all living; the object of duty becomes all the dead, in accordance with the old duty, which protected the ashes of the fathers, "who shall rise again." Therefore, all powers are obliged to set as a principle of moral education: to live not for oneself and not for others, but with all and for all, i.e. with all living for all the dead. The goal of intellectual education should be set: to make all knowledgeable and everything - the subject of knowledge. Then science will be a conclusion from observations made by all, everywhere and always, and not from observations made by someone, somewhere and sometime. The goal of the common cause will be the unification or pacification of all in the work of understanding the blind force and turning it from deadly to reviving, which requires the conversion of an army or the entire people, who have become an army, into a natural science force through universal compulsory education; and through this the entire people will be converted to the knowledge of the deadly force of nature, the manifestation of which, according to the Copernican view, is connected with the course or cycle of the earth; and we see it, this manifestation of deadly force, especially in cemeteries. If at the present time there is no place completely safe from a sudden invasion, then the military education of the people must begin with the defense of cemeteries, the ashes of the fathers, and in cemeteries spiritual and secular education must create temples-schools and universal scientific temples, museums. The strengthening of cemeteries will turn citizens into sons, and together with the strengthening of cemeteries for the protection of the ashes of the fathers, the action against the deadly (hunger- and death-bearing) force begins, i.e. active observations are added to passive observations. The erected field fortifications, it must be assumed, will also have significance for regulation: their ditches will be deepened annually, and the ramparts and towers will be constantly raised, and the number of observation points themselves will be constantly increased. The conversion of the watchtowers, which form the basis of the forts and kremlins, if they were preserved, into observatories, as well as the construction of temple-schools with towers and temple-museums with towers, i.e. with observatories, will also be an expression of the transition to the regulation of the atmospheric process, and through it to the management of the earth's movement itself. Assuming, in accordance with the Copernican worldview, that the earth is a moving body that we must control, compulsory education takes students out of the classrooms and onto the towers in order to determine the movement of our earthly vehicle by the movement of the stars, i.e. to begin with the observation of apparent movement and move on to the real. Just as the vertical position was an expression of the first inner ascent, when the sky opened up before the sons of men, so the ascent to the towers will be an expression of inner ascent, a denial of the factory, industrial system. Those who have reached the towers will learn that the earth is a celestial body, and the stars are earths; they will learn that falling worlds are revealed to them, who have risen up, resisting the fall. Such classroom and extracurricular education and teaching in the towers and in the field will prepare for action, for regulation.