So long expected by Christianity, the Last Judgment finally came! There was an inexorable false pussy, in the person of the Koenigsberg professor Kant with several judges or false-lip of lower order, such as contents and millets. European and American intelligent humanity recognized the court right and condemnation - fair and has not yet protected his court sentences. Meanwhile, he condemned everyone or all the highest to close imprisonment; He gave freedom to everything lower. He called the maxims that he pronounced over knowledge, deeds and works, he did not call “judgments” (except for judgments about art), but usually “critics”, although he could directly call prisons, just as he called religion in prison, very narrow limits of pure reason, because he and the most “pure” mind he condemned to eternal darkness, then ignorance, no ignorance, ignorance, ignorance, ignorance, ignorance, ignorance There is a lower mind in Hades, in Hades, to a place devoid of light.

An unfortunate practical mind is placed in even narrower limits. The practical mind not only allows, but also requires imperatively, “imperative” to do good, but with the obligation not to destroy evil. [With such a setting of practical mind] it is safe to say that the gates of Paradise will not overcome hell! Allowing people their small deeds, the legislator of the practical mind does not speak of one general thing, a great business, and the Union for this business-the Church-allows only the old-Roman, only legally ...

Kant’s lies or limitations were the denial of or non -recognition of the common cause, in the denial, which is a prejudice inherent in the estate, doomed to one thinking.

The criticism of religion condemned the dogma, because in moral theology, Kant did not see the common cause, that is, the subject of moral theology was not a common cause, or, in short, the dogmas were not commandments.

The practical mind did not destroy evil in the world, because he did not allow a common cause, but only actions alone. He did not want to know the actions of all reasonable creatures on all unreasonable power, although both forces, the nature is reasonable and unreasonable, separately [taken] were only parts, and did not constitute a whole. [Meanwhile] If the whole world became the subject of management of all reasonable creatures, then the judgments about the whole world would already be synthetic judgments of A-Priori.

[Finally, the criticism of the artistic mind was not a common to recreate, that is, it did not require the recreation of what was destroyed by unreasonable power, but was limited to the judgment of aesthetic and teleological, forgetting that both beauty and expediency were not a blind power, but a reasonable one, and moreover, the aggregate.

The contradiction, the antinomy of intelligent creatures and unreasonable power will not be resolved, until the rational (reasonably thinking) creatures will not become reasonably acting, that is, until two minds, theoretical and practical, and with them the third - artistic and religious. [Only in this way] the contradiction of the rational and unreasonable will be eliminated, lying inside the nature itself, as coming, but has not yet come into consciousness.