(To the article: how to turn the guns of war and social struggle into the instruments of salvation from general disasters?)

Currently, European states have been invented by the new special way of enslaving Asian states through instructors proposed by Europeans to the Asians for the organization or formation of land and naval forces, who should serve to protect or defend their customers from all other peoples, joining the completeness of enslaving for the management of troops by order and financial means of patronizing the country. This is what Germany did with the Turkeea; England wants to do the same with China. Spain would also act if she defeated the Americans, and if she managed to cope with internal enemies, fear of which prevents her from reconciling with the external. So the American states will act, turning into a military state, without which, that is, without military forces, no industrial state can exist, even if it itself was protected from external enemies. But no matter what state becomes an instructor in Chinese forces, whether England or Germany or any other state, any of them will try to make a strong enemy of Russia from China. If, however, Russia, as an instructor, would be able to compete with the construction of naval forces with England, and the arrangement of land forces with Germany, would it be useful for her to come into a competition with experienced in cunning Europeans?

It would be very respectable, of course, to offer the appeal of the guns of war and the social struggle in a means of salvation from general disasters; But it would be possible to offer this only in case if the reality of this fund was confirmed by experience. And the truth must be said that there is no other in the size of a land state, except for Russia, which could produce any evidence-based experience of the influence of the tools used in wars on atmospheric phenomena. The high cost of the content of the military forces does not oblige the state to take care of extracting the greatest benefit from this, so expensive protection means? The combination of universal binding education and knowledge with universally necessarily military service would bring very significant benefits, especially if it was possible to regulate multi -house and childlessness, i.e., if it were possible to save from the crop failures. To prove its disinterestedness, Russia could not impose its instructors, but to invite capable people from China or other countries that need the construction of military forces to transfer the Russian system to them. Thus, probably, it would be possible to counteract Western European political scammers.