Hegel calls his “logic” “the kingdom of shadows”, that is, hell, and then by the image of God, which he is his eternal essence before the creation of nature and the final spirit. Otherwise, limiting reasonable creatures, Hegel gives the will to be blind power, subordinates to her people. Undoubtedly, in this respect of intelligent and moral creatures to spontaneous power, which does not know either reason or morality, Hell found his complete expression! The true God did not create the minds of the final, limited and did not give them to power by blind power! The rational creatures themselves, having entered the struggle between themselves, limited each other and fell under the yoke of spontaneous nature, while, remaining in unity or uniting again, they could control it.

Supramoralism, as true Christianity, demanding the unification of rational beings to turn the strength to killing into a reviving, returning "shadows" flesh and blood, - supramoralism turns hell into paradise. In this sense, “logic”, if in her 3rd part, put the projectivity between subjectivity and objectivity, that is, a plan of salvation or (expressing more specifically) universal resurrection instead of birth or development (evolution), “logic”, acted, from the Old Testament or Protestant would become Christian.

Supramoralism is an image of the “Prevention Council”, a plan, a project of universal resurrection. [On the contrary, Hegel] lets go to the will of the blind power in his philosophy of nature, and moreover, even after the all -acquiring substance has already become a subject, it has already come to consciousness and not only felt, but also became a concept, understood the evil that was created in her unconscious state. [Meanwhile, just, in contrast to Hegel, not releasing the strength of nature to arbitrariness, but directing them properly, it is necessary] being, which has formed or rather, which has become uncertain, lifeless, and turn into packing. In the same way, Kant’s transcendental aesthetics, converted from astronomy and history into lifeless space during or in the “kingdom of shadows”, must be turned into immanent aesthetics, in other words, all lifeless worlds must be revived through generations returned to life.