"In our time," according to Tolstoy, "the purpose of art is clear and definite: the task of Christian art is to achieve the fraternal unity of people." Yes, it would be definite and clear if instead of the word people there stood the sons of men, then fraternal would have a direct and precise meaning. In the ordinary sense, understandable to everyone, beginning with children, brotherhood is based on the fatherland: only through our fathers are we brothers; brotherhood without the fatherland is incomprehensible, and the fraternal unity of sons can be complete only in the father's work. But Tolstoy does not mention fathers; if he does not deny fathers, then in any case he ignores them. What is his fraternal unity of people based on? True, natural, real brotherhood, complete brotherhood, is brotherhood according to the fatherland; but there are brotherhoods according to other foundations, there is, for example, brotherhood in arms... But even in arms, brotherhood exists for the defense of the fatherland; and if weapons are turned to salvation from hunger, from crop failures - as has been proposed since 1891 - in that case weapons will no longer be destructive and will become weapons of universal brotherhood; and then not only will disarmament not be necessary - which is impossible - but it will be necessary to involve everyone and for life in the fulfillment of military service, since this service, saving from hunger, as one of the causes of death, cannot ignore diseases, which also lead to death; saving the living from death, it cannot forget those who have already died; that is, this will be a brotherhood precisely for the fatherly cause. Brotherhood is not only by arms; brotherhood is also by craft, by occupation or work; but for universal brotherhood it is required that the occupation be universal; for unification it is even necessary that everyone have one common cause; and only in this case will the brotherhood not be empty and idle; such an occupation can be agriculture. Agriculture, however, requires a return from the cities to the village, to the ashes of the fathers, and at the present time it is the conversion of the ashes of the fathers into food for the descendants. However, such use of the ashes of the fathers is only temporary, not final, caused by the separation of the worlds. Military service, as a means against crop failures, already requires that agriculture be a universal occupation. Brotherhood can also be in terms of food; the expressions are well known: "classmates, fellow-shoemakers, fellow-cupmakers"; and Christianity has combined food, as a condition of life, existence, with the commemoration of the dead: the Eucharist is gratitude to the fathers for the life received from them by returning life to them, which is now accomplished mysteriously in commemoration, in communion, a reverent attitude to which, Tolstoy says, was taught to people by art, and not by childish, filial feeling, as it was in reality. In remembrance, in communion, the taking of food is as necessarily connected with the remembrance of the dead as it is necessary for the maintenance and continuation of life of the living; and such a connection of food with remembrance in the strict, direct sense means that the excess of strength given by food to sons must be used to replenish the loss of strength of aging, dying fathers and to return life to the dead; and in communion this reminder is made of those whose excess of strength given by food is currently used for birth, for growth. Histotherapy and organotherapy are, one might say, a weak beginning of the use of the filial excess of strength to replenish the loss of strength of the fathers. Thus, if the weapon that takes life is turned into an instrument of agriculture, into an instrument that provides the means for maintaining and returning life, then brotherhood in such weapons is a true brotherhood, an alliance of sons for the return of life to the fathers; it is a brotherhood in common occupation and labor. But Tolstoy may say that he recognizes brotherhood not by fatherland, but by humanity; in that case, in order to understand the meaning of brotherhood by humanity, we must define what man is. Previously, man meant mortal; but this definition is inaccurate and even incorrect; in the strict sense, man is the son of dead fathers; he knows death not in himself, but only from previous cases; “mortal” is an induction, not a deduction. If man is the son of dead fathers, then we again return to the fatherland, and death, of course, in this case too, must lead to unification; but to unification for what purpose?..

If man is a verbal being, as opposed to speechless, to which animals are attributed, then the unification will be a literary or speaking society. But if such a union is called brotherhood, does it exclude hostility?.. However, in order for this union to be worldwide, it is necessary to unite in the language of all peoples, and to unite in a language not artificial, like Volapük, but in a natural, ancestral language. Linguistics is a science that studies all languages, and cannot have any other application than the development of a common language for all peoples: at present there is a root word of languages ​​of Aryan origin; there will, of course, be a root word of all languages; the study of the roots of words through compulsory education will spread everywhere, and the study of one's own and foreign languages ​​will be and to the knowledge of what is common, related, paternal, ancestral in them; in the alphabet itself, syllables and syllables will be replaced by common roots and thus will make sense of them. In creating a common language in this way, we will necessarily approach the ancestral language, which will come into use, however, only to the extent that all people master common labor; and this labor can only be paternal work. Thus, real unification in language also leads to the fatherland.

If man is a rational being, then the unification or brotherhood will be a learned society; but even if it were possible to unite everyone in knowledge and this unification became worldwide, nevertheless it would not exclude hostility and would obviously not be fraternal. Only the filial feeling, common to all, gives knowledge a purpose, i.e. it unites people in the knowledge of the power that kills fathers, reveals their souls, unites them in mutual knowledge and, making people brothers in the deepest sense of the word, leads to the return of life to the dead. But this is impossible, Tolstoy will say. Although we, like him, do not know why this is impossible, we will not assert that the resurrection will certainly take place; but it is already true that if we do not all unite in the work of resurrection, in an undoubtedly brotherly matter, then we will not be brothers. And if a person is a moral being, then in order to remain moral he must either return life to the dead, or die himself; to survive the death of a father, recognizing the impossibility of resurrection, means not to be a son, not to be a brother, not to be, therefore, a moral being. They also call man a burial creature, finding that burial is a distinctive feature, exclusively inherent in man alone. The original meaning of burial, funeral service (exorcism), ablution, as is known, was reviving; now this meaning has been lost and even the word "otpety" is used not in the sense of reviving, but in the sense of hopelessly lost; but the meaning of the word "son of man" has also been lost and has even gone out of use, and it has been replaced by the meaningless "man". With this loss, all the requirements associated with filial feeling, which, of course, also caused burial in the sense of resurrection, have also lost their meaning.

By replacing the definite "son of man" with the indefinite "man", we have deprived ourselves of the opportunity to say who our common enemy is, what our common cause is. If our common cause consists in eradication, in liberation from the misfortunes common to all, then our age does not know or recognize any common cause at all; in the same way our age does not know the common enemy of all people, and does not even want to know, because a blind, insensitive force, which is the common enemy of all, cannot be made to feel its hatred. Our age does not understand love, just as it does not understand Christianity, because under love for some (as, for example, for the poor) usually hides hatred for others (the rich). A complete misunderstanding of Christianity is already evident from the fact that Christ is not called the Son of Man, as He called Himself, but a man; they know an abstract God, and not the God of the fathers; they do not recognize the commandment - "Be like children," i.e. like sons, like daughters, at all, although in it, in fact, is contained and from it follows the greatest commandment. All this has led to the fact that by brotherhood they understand not sons, but simply people, i.e. good, non-hostile relations between people. The uncertainty of the common cause and the common enemy is the most characteristic feature of our century. In the man who brought this century to an end, who must be recognized as Tolstoy, this uncertainty, obscurity and indefiniteness are especially obvious; it is this that led him to preach “non-doing.” “Non-doing” is a consistent conclusion from what he says about the fraternal unity of people, the realization of which, in his opinion, supposedly consists in the task of Christian art in our time, a task that boils down to evoking “reverence for the dignity of every person, for the life of every animal” (i.e., the dignity of man obviously consists in sacrificing his life to animals). The goal of art will be achieved, from Tolstoy’s point of view, of course, only when it compels people “freely and joyfully, without noticing it,” to give themselves up to be devoured by animals, i.e. when it compels people not to become the best, but simply not to be, to free the world from themselves and leave it to beasts and cattle, or to destruction and lust. In regard to people, Tolstoy is concerned only with the fact that they “freely and joyfully, without noticing it,” sacrifice themselves; i.e., art for Tolstoy is only vinegar mixed with bile, which he offers to people, leading them to execution. Is it possible to go further in misanthropy? Or have we perhaps misunderstood Tolstoy? How glad we would be if, indeed, we were mistaken!

And yet the goal cannot even be “sacrifice of oneself to serve people,” to which Tolstoy also obliges art to encourage, the first duty of which, incidentally, is to arouse reverence for the life of animals and only for the dignity of man. True love consists in living not for oneself and not for others (not egoism, not even altruism): one must live with everyone and for everyone, i.e. with all the living, for all the dead.

Reverence not for God, but for the dignity of man, but not for his life; reverence for the life of an animal, but not for his dignity; reverence, therefore, for that by which an animal differs from man, i.e. for brutality and bestiality - this is what Tolstoy calls for! Reverence is a term that has hitherto been applied to a being possessing all perfections, all-encompassing love, omniscience, omnipotence, etc., and now Tolstoy applies this term (not to mention an animal) to the dignity of man; he applies it to a being that does not have these perfections. However, Tolstoy does not make it his duty to achieve these perfections. Reverence is inspired by the dignity of a being whose life, according to Tolstoy, has no value, and who must sacrifice his life to the lives of animals. The very dignity of man, obviously, lies in sacrificing his life to animals, in yielding the world to them. But why, after such decisive definitions, did Tolstoy need to talk about shame before luxury, before violence, before revenge, and even about the need to sacrifice oneself to serve people - not all people, of course, but only some? All this is so insignificant and petty after the question of all people in relation to animals was decided, and decided in the sense that people, for the sake of preserving their dignity, must sacrifice themselves, their lives, their existence for animals. If Tolstoy considered our life worse than the life of all animals, and us morally lower than all cattle and beasts—as we sometimes hear from good, well-meaning people who want to elevate us—then Tolstoy would, of course, be right. But no! Tolstoy believes that all the dignity of man, the reverence for which this Pharisee of Pharisees preaches, lies precisely in the dedication of our lives to animals: otherwise, what would it mean—“reverence for the dignity of every man, for the life of every animal”? The idea is expressed too clearly: man must give his life to animals; Tolstoy says this quite consciously, with a full understanding of the consequences that follow from it; he knows that once these goals are recognized, fraternal unity will no longer be aimless; it will be in the reverence of each for the dignity of all other people and in the reverence of all people for the life of every animal; fraternal union will consist in mutual assistance to one another and in the exercise of reverence for the life of animals; and fraternal jealousy for the dignity of each person will cover with shame those who would like to save their lives from being devoured by animals!

This is what Tolstoy turns reverence into, this highest, most holy feeling in which all the powers of the human soul are united. Reverence can only be caused by complete perfection; that is why it pertains to God and to such a life—to human life—that is capable of attaining the likeness of Divine perfection.

Reverence also contains the greatest commandment, i.e. the commandment about the love of God of the fathers and the brotherhood of sons. The commandment “Be like children,” and this commandment found its complete negation precisely in the fact that Tolstoy replaced reverence for God and for the life of the fathers with reverence for the life of animals and for the dignity of man, as the renunciation of his life as a rational being for the sake of the life of animals.

If man is a being standing vertically, i.e. resisting the fall, gravity, this universal force of nature, and, at the same time, if he is also a being turned towards heaven, then the unification will have as its goal a task not limited to the earth. If the concept of the immortal has merged with the heavenly, and the concept of the mortal with the earthly, then the vertical position, turning towards heaven, is consequently caused by death, by loss. The task, the labor of this being - whose upper limbs, in the vertical position, have become organs of labor - has become the return of life to the lost, the dead; and through them, i.e. the resurrected, the counteraction to gravity will spread to all worlds, transforming this counteraction into the management of the worlds, into regulation...

The riddle of the sphinx, which concerns mainly the third support, which must be considered as an organ of work, as an organ of labor created by man himself or the son of man, has not yet been solved, and the sphinx continues to devour man; nature continues to punish man for ignorance and inaction, to subject him to the death penalty. By the third support one can and should understand a lightning rod raised on an aerostat, extracting thunderstorm force and, of course, not only to preserve its own life, but to return life to those who have lost it; but this is only a weak beginning of regulation by the forces of nature.