Should all the arts be united in tragedy, as a depiction of the destruction of the world, or should all the arts be united in architecture, as a project of the world resurrecting all that has perished through all knowledge united in astronomy?

If the world is will, that is, lust, manifesting itself in the absorption of the previous by the subsequent, then the world as a representation of such a tragic absorption must become a project for the return of life to the previous by all that follows; in other words: sons must return their fathers to life and thereby save the world, and not admire its tragic destruction.

The projective definition includes both the world will and the reason that must govern it; it must include both knowledge (science) and art for the work of converting the world from the unconscious and insensitive to the one governed by reason and feeling.

From this it is easy to understand what the mistakes of Schopenhauer, R. Wagner and their successor Nietzsche are, who combined all means and forces for an exciting depiction of the destruction of the human race, and not for saving it from destruction.

If the world as lust had achieved self-determination, then it could not remain a contemplation of such ugliness as death and destruction, but had to become a project of resurrection. If the world had found a voice (in the realm of music) to express its experiences, then this voice, these sounds could only be a complaint, a lament of sons and especially daughters, doomed by fate to devour their fathers and mothers - a lament in the temple and outside the temple. And this complaint would not be an expression of intoxicating lust; it would not be a hymn of Bacchic intoxication, but a penitential hymn, sobering from temptation - from sin and fall. If, however, in the person of sons the world received organs of action, then it must be recognized that those who received them, but who had not yet attained knowledge of the nature that gives birth and kills, were busy creating only likenesses of the beings being devoured and the power that devours them. Thus arose the likenesses of the dead (sculpture and portrait painting), likenesses of heaven and earth - monuments and temples (architecture). But in the temple the transition to another, higher art had already begun: temples were not only likenesses of what is, but also projects of what should be, namely: not an imaginary, but a real resurrection; temples that arose over the ashes of fathers, created by grief over their loss, were also a place of prayer for their return, and at the same time - of teaching this filial duty and work.

Thus, true art arises from complaints, from the lamentations of daughters at the gravestones of their fathers or in the monument-temple itself. This creation of the mourning sons unites all the arts in architecture, not as a likeness, but as a project of the world as it should be, that is, a new earth and a new heaven, filled with a power that does not destroy and kill, but recreates.

But for Schopenhauer and Wagner, the world remained a lust that manifests itself in wedding song and dance; the whole world has turned into the setting of a wedding feast. For Nietzsche, marital intoxication resolves itself into a tragic catastrophe: all the arts are united in tragedy or musical drama. Drama here unites with music and dance against the background of an artistic landscape, thus having no internal connection with painting and even less with sculpture, although drama itself could be called spiritualized sculpture. With such merely external unification of the arts in musical drama, the entire theatre that contains it remains only an external receptacle for this mechanical combination of arts—a canopy spread over the spectators or the walls and roof for protection from the sun or bad weather; it does not participate in the action, unlike that organic unification that all the arts receive in the highest manifestation of architecture—in the temple.

The temple calls all the arts to spiritualization, to revival, not to the likeness of the living and the living, but to the actual recreation of life (in all its fullness, beauty and strength). The arts also already strive to restore life, but in a false sense or to an imperfect degree.<<*1>>

Thus sculpture restores by moral (family or filial) necessity that which is hidden underground by physical necessity. But sculpture restores what was and what lived in forms that have not yet overcome blind, elemental necessity, in forms that are still dead, stiff, motionless.

Painting restores the light and shadow side of the living and its "external outlines. But the features and colors of painting, like the forms of sculpture, are motionless, limited by the boundaries of only one moment; colors "shine, but do not warm," and all "painting is only an outline, a sketch," an "inventory of life," infinitely distant from the living beat of reality, from life itself.

Music, on the contrary, is entirely devoted to the world of internal emotions and experiences. But with all its sincerity, precisely because of its incorporeality, it is lost in the uncertainty of particulars and in the vagueness of general moods. This is something truly intimate, already beyond the soul, and not directly sounding in it, these are not the sounds themselves, but only echoes of what is experienced and lived, transmitted by artificial means through an artificially established environment.

Finally, drama restores what was and lived not only not only in the plastic and colorful fullness of forms, but also in movement, not genuine, however, but false: it brings to the stage not the "hidden underground", not the dead; it only makes the living "actor", that is, "only in appearance an actor" (according to the correct Old Russian definition), and not the real "actor" ("actor") put on the mask of the dead.

If in this way not one of the arts in their current imperfection rises to the heights of the task of recreating the living, but is limited to the creation of imitations of life, its likenesses, then the combination of such arts must turn out to be traceless and fruitless, despite all the passions and hopes of the Wagnerians. If the Schopenhauer-Wagner-Nietzschean philosophy demands the unification of the arts in musical drama, that is, in illusion, and reduces all human affairs to illusion, then one cannot help but be surprised that another form of unified art has not yet appeared to replace this obvious absurdity, one that would unite all the arts in architecture as a likeness of the universe and all knowledge in astronomy, so that through this artistic-scientific force the universe itself would become a temple of resurrection from a temple of mortification.

*1 The small print printed below has been restored from scattered sketches and from Nikolai Fyodorovich's conversations about art (V.A.K.).