In chloral hydrate, the methods of which Nietzsche abused during his illnesses, which occupied a very large place in his short life, one can see the key to his entire teaching and to his main idea. “And this idea,” says Lichtenberger, “is the idea of ​​the will in the very contemplation of human suffering and death, of the will, delightedly drawing the certainty that it itself is immortal,” which, consequently, is at least this immortality, which, however, it does not need due to its blindness and unconsciousness.

If we were to personify chloral hydrate figuratively as a hero or superman, just as the Hellenes personified grape juice and its effects in the divine image of Dionysus or Bacchus, and the Semites in the image of their forefather Noah, then we would have the key to the idea of ​​the "Dionysian spirit" and "tragic culture." Here would be the source of Nietzsche's later fascination with the doctrine of the endless returns of life and the endless returns of death, in which he "with delight" saw the immortality created by the methods of chloral hydrate. He could apply his idea of ​​the Dionysian spirit or cult and tragic culture to universal history, considered from a biblical point of view, calling it the Noachian spirit and the Ham culture or European. In this culture, subsequent generations of prodigal sons are exalted and mock their fathers. This is a Socratic culture, for it does not honor Christ, but Socrates. In this commercial and industrial culture, in the "positive" sense, a significant role belongs to the descendants of Shem, who exchanged the cult of the fathers for the cult of gold. But there is no place in it for Japheth, the honorer of the fathers, as well as for Christ, the Redeemer of the fathers from the shadow of death. Nietzsche is an opponent of the cult of the fathers and Christianity; he refuses to create, and re-creation does not even occur to him. There are different types of intoxication: for some it is expressed in tears, for others in laughter, for others in destruction. Nietzsche also belongs to the latter type: "he represents a tragic thinker living in a Socratic civilization," according to the definition of the thoughtful critic Lichtenberger; he looks at the world through the eyes of the pessimist Schopenhauer. In nature he sees a terrible, often harmful (it would be much more accurate to say "mortifying") and generative force. History seems to him to be brutally violent and senseless. It would be more accurate to say that history is mutual extermination, in which brutality is expressed. However, next to brutality there is also bestiality; but Nietzsche did not notice it. A process in which brutality and bestiality reign is, of course, devoid of meaning.

History is different, history as a project (of what should be), and Nietzsche did not even dream of it. "I dream (he says) of a society of people who do not know convention," i.e., limitations, who do not recognize mercy and call themselves destroyers. All of humanity must tirelessly work to educate several great personalities. It has no other task. Thus, the majority must sacrifice all their strength and even life for education, but not for happiness, for the latter goal would be eudaemonistic. Everyone must work to create great thinkers, that is, beings condemned to abstract thinking without action, and artists who exist to create not anything real, but only semblances (illusions). There is no place for saints in this society and in this creative process, just as there is no need for them here. Indeed, whom would we understand here by saints? Those who live for God? But God is “killed” in Nietzsche. Or those who live for people? But to live for “unsuccessful” works, such as people, would be an act of compassion, ridiculed and reviled by the worshiper of ruthless force. If one must live only for the lucky ones, then to accomplish such a feat all other people, the unfortunate ones, would have to be saints, while sainthood is not necessary for the darlings of fate and happiness. <<1>>

Thus, all the unsuccessful products of nature, together with the successful ones, must work for the production of a tragic personality - such is Nietzsche's conclusion.

True happiness, he says, repeating Schopenhauer, is impossible; and he treats the happiness of the people or, according to him, the crowd with contempt and hatred. Expressing the thoughts of a verbose chatterbox as briefly as possible, we will say: he is a worshipper of truth, justice and sincerity, but without paying attention to the sufferings of others and to his own; he destroys everything that, in his opinion, should be destroyed. Recalling what was said above about nature and history, it is impossible to indicate what should remain undestroyed for him. And from creation, he says, is it not better to refuse outright? "There are flabby pessimists, submissive souls; we are not of their number," Nietzsche concludes his reasoning, having, of course, taken a very large dose of chloral hydrate. He denies nirvana and calls everything that gives value to life good. But in a tragic culture one can only revel in the destruction of one's own personality and others, hoping for one impersonal principle, and for intoxication, also supposedly eternal. In short: Nietzsche demands the unification of all for the production of a few tragic personalities who will be drunk to be destroyed by everyone, not excluding themselves.

Although it was said about Rus' that "drinking is joy"; but the Russians drank "from grief", the very grief from which the philosopher is delighted. The disputes, fights, and massacres that ended the Novgorod veche assemblies, of course, came from the Dionysian (Antichristian) source, from the spirit of intoxication. But the construction of ordinary churches by voluntary, collective, national labor, especially widespread in the Novgorod lands, as a sign of the end of discord and civil strife and with the goal of ending or preventing general destruction, the construction of ordinary churches, accompanied not by Bacchic choirs, but by prayer choirs, as well as the people's march in 1892 to the Trinity Lavra on the 500th anniversary of the venerator of the Holy Trinity and the mentor of the Russian land to unification - all this was the product not of the spirit of intoxication, but of the spirit of sobriety from lust and enmity; and all this shows that Russia did not always have "the joy of drinking," that it was capable of perceiving not only the spirit of the Antichrist, but also the spirit of Christ. The name of the Antichrist is unknown; but, according to Nietzsche, he will be Dionysus or Bacchus. The name of Christ is known: Jesus, that is, the Savior of the world from sin. In contrast to the origin of pagan tragedy from the spirit of intoxication, we must place the Christian tragedy of sobering up from sin and conquering it and its consequence, death - the tragedy of Good Friday and Holy Saturday and Bright Sunday, or the Easter of Suffering and the Easter of Resurrection.

1 The text from which these thoughts are taken is so long and filled with so many repetitions that it is completely false to call Nietzsche a master of aphorisms (as is customary). Aphorisms, i.e. proverbs, belong to the people. Nietzsche's works are completely similar to the products of modern industry: in them, for the sake of appearance, the inner content is sacrificed. They are beautiful and meaningless. He produced much and quickly, but with little thought and without effort. Only in borrowed thoughts is there serious meaning for him.