(Nietzsche)
"By renouncing war, you renounce the great in life."
"It is not the good goal that justifies war, but the good of war that justifies every goal."

A philosopher of struggle, of exterminating everything weak in order to develop a new type of "superman," is a philosopher who wants to kill Christianity, but unwillingly kills only Buddhism. For the philosopher of the Black Kingdom or for the Black Prophet, the Antichrist appears as an ideal. "The future hero of the tragic worldview" is only the Forerunner of the Antichrist. The Antichrist sees good and happiness in strength and power, but not over the blind force of nature; he also desires war, but not war with this blind force.

Is "The Origin of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music" a product of the upsurge caused by Germany's victories over France? This is an apology for Schopenhauer's pessimism against a contemporary exponent of a supposedly Socratic, flatly optimistic way of thinking (that is, against David Strauss, a denier of Christianity, the author of "The Old and the New Faith"). But what significance do this work and "Untimely Meditations" have for their time? What is their relation to contemporary events in those days when a quasi-ecumenical council declared the pope infallible, and France, having forced Germany to declare war on itself, made the pope, with whom the West confuses Christianity, a prisoner, a Vatican prisoner?

Among the lampoons on (the historian) Strauss and other philistines and the panegyrics on Schopenhauer and Wagner in the same series of "Untimely Thoughts" appears "On the Benefits and Harms of History for Life" - a lampoon on history and a panegyric on life, which, one must assume, is connected with Germany's transition from scholarly inaction to political and economic "action".

A remarkable remedy is offered by this physician, namely, the non-historical element of life, that is, the strength and ability to forget, so that everything New, everything that he calls Superhistorical, will be only the forgotten Old, dead! If the author were not possessed by a ridiculous self-exaltation (a relic of the old lackey aristocracy), then by history he would have to understand knowledge in general as the product of one class. Meanwhile, all those who make history must be converted into those who know, so that the distinction between the non-historical and the historical would disappear, and the supra-historical would appear, the expression of which would be a universal, sacred work, in which the forces of religion, knowledge and art would merge, in a word, a real universal resurrection.

Having called artists, these supposedly “naturally backward people”, enthusiastic, that is, intoxicated heralds of the religious and philosophical errors of mankind, thus recognizing all religions and all philosophical systems as wanderings, Nietzsche would have been close to the truth if in his next work, “The Wanderer and His Shadow” (= The Rootless Vagabond!) he had discerned and recognized the prodigal son,<<1>> pursuing his shadow, that is, “knowing himself” or knowing only himself, taking his ghost for reality, and all others and everything else for ideas. By saying that it is better for humanity to perish than for knowledge to regress, he also renounces humanism, but does not come to the son of man.

To maintain symmetry, in the second period of his wanderings, he should have written a panegyric to Strauss, just as he did for Socrates, and a lampoon of Schopenhauer <<2>> and Wagner, which, incidentally, he seems to have done in the Turin Letter (1888) regarding the latter. Changing his idols, Nietzsche always remained faithful to Darwin, although he did not admit it and even considered Darwin to be mediocre.

All the works of the first period of Nietzsche's authorial activity, all these "untimely reflections" are included in his first work "On the Origin of Tragedy" or, more precisely, on the origin of the highest tragic culture, Schopenhauer-Wagnerian, in contrast to the low philistinism of Strauss as a historian and philosopher. And yet “Human, All Too Human” is dedicated to that very Voltaire about whom Strauss wrote sympathetically! “Human, All Too Human” was, one must assume, an experiment in condemning humanism or the virtuosity of art in the name of knowledge. Only pessimism needs such art, that is, only real evil needs an imaginary good or enchanting visions and joyful illusions.

“Dawn” and “Joyful (Glad) Science” constitute a transitional period from his second, scientific period to the third . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Nietzsche is a philosopher of a new kind and a new generation, a philosopher of the united "New Germany", completely different from the old philosopher-thinkers. The task of this new philosophy is to establish the goal of life, to govern life. But if the desire for power is the highest virtue, then only in the sense of the desire for power over blind force, which the German (a typical representative of the new Germany), the "Judge of Life", as he called himself, did not understand at all.

What had hitherto been the greatest abuse, the extreme condemnation he is the Antichrist, but now (in Nietzsche) it is considered the highest praise. The proclamation of the “culture of the tragic worldview” is a preparation for the coming “catastrophe of the world,” that is, its end; and if all of humanity must one day die (and who doubts the inevitability of this death?), then its highest task is to grow together into one common and united whole and, as something integral, to go with tragic understanding to meet the coming destruction. The “Black Tsar” lacked only a “Black Prophet,”<<*1>> and yet the Black Prophet appeared before the Black Tsar. Despite, however, the passionate desire to seem terrible, in this Black Prophet one sees only a German professor who talks about worldview and about mental struggle, and not about the actual destruction of the world, and even less about the salvation of the world. 1 This freethinking wanderer has lost his goal and lost his way. This is the prodigal son, that is, man (from the point of view of humanism).

2 In Schopenhauer, Nietzsche saw his liberator on the way to himself.

*1 That is, the fundamental justifier and legitimizer of his actions. (V.A.K.).