Russian philosophical thought represents a special trend in the world history of philosophy. In the present time of a certain revival of the national question, it is more than appropriate to recall what Russian thinkers said about the world task of our great people and to reveal in what way they themselves were its representatives. Little attention was paid to this, and yet the special structure of Russian philosophical thought is interesting because it reveals to us what Russia can give to the world.

Let us note in advance the special features of Russian philosophical thought. The first is the construction by Russian philosophers of schemes without the complex rationalistic argumentation usual in the West - schemes aimed at the same time at the search for and clarification of the broadest goals. Thus, one can note the vagueness of thought in connection with the special breadth of the tasks.

Another special feature is the more practical form of presentation of these broad concepts, usually confined to the consideration of questions of applied significance (religious, political, social). The majority of Russian theoretical constructions have as their task to directly turn into a "business", to cause this or that government measure or the desired mood of intelligentsia. This applies equally to both right and left authors. Likewise, our writers were usually not only artists, but thinkers, but only of an applied nature.

All these features: practicality and dependence on the current moment, as well as weak theorizing, in connection with the broadest goals and tasks, - with difficulty allow us to understand the basic ideas of Russian philosophical thought.

That is why it seems very dear to study the works of the few Russian thinkers who managed to rise to the theoretical consciousness of the ideas of Russian philosophical thought. There are so many obstacles on the path to precise thinking in Russian philosophy! One cannot help but mention the general intelligentsia's efforts not to allow their leaders to reach an agreement to the end, to dot the "i's". After all, when researching, it turns out that Russian thinkers freed from these shackles usually reached the point of clarifying and accurately comprehending the foundation of Russian life and thought—Orthodox Christianity, understood, however, by almost every thinker in a unique way.

In such a unique form, this main foundation was recognized and usually hushed up by our semi-intellectuals, the almost unknown Russian philosopher Nikolai Fyodorovich Fyodorov.

Interest in him is enhanced by the uniqueness of his understanding of the said foundation of Russian life—Orthodoxy: he understood Orthodoxy as the task of actual fulfillment, actual implementation of the Kingdom of God on earth, and as a means of realizing this, he put forward the philosophy of a common cause. It is extremely interesting for us that a thinker was found who formulated the already mentioned practicality of Russian philosophical thought, having put forward the principle of the cause.

Let us move on immediately to his personality. After all, the unique principle of the matter, put forward by him, immediately directs our thought to how this thinker himself tried to implement the matter, how he contributed to the penetration of Orthodoxy into life.

N. F. Fedorov spent his life, judging by external signs, more than modestly. First - a district teacher, then - a librarian and passionate bibliophile of the Rumyantsev Museum, then - an employee in the Moscow Archives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who earned himself a pension after hard work of only 17 rubles. 51 kopecks per month.

But behind this modest position was hidden a powerful multifaceted activity, at first glance it will seem - little connected with his broad philosophical constructions, but nevertheless having this connection to the strongest degree.

For example, let us mention at least one strange phenomenon that he represented in his library work. He was obsessed with the project of developing the best card for the catalogue from eternal material, with brief bibliographic information. But even this seemingly strange project, randomly snatched from countless similar ones, was quite rationally connected with his general ideas.

A library is, in his opinion, a kind of necropolis of dear thoughts of a whole series of preceding generations. It is an intermediary in the connection, living and active, of ancestors with descendants. Everything that was obtained in the field of knowledge, all the best from the work of our fathers is stored there in extract, and we must protect it from all-destroying time, we must skillfully and easily use their heritage. Nikolai Fyodorovich personally considered himself at the general disposal of all visitors to the library. Facts and memories confirm this. He spent hours looking for the books students needed, was always ready to share his colossal knowledge of books, and helped with advice to anyone wishing to study something.

In the same way as the library, he imagined the desired structure of the Museum. Here again, everything that was created by everyone for the common benefit is collected in samples. And everything should be replenished by everyone. In his idea, he called the Rumyantsev Museum Pre-Kremlin, i.e. one where all the traditions of Russian history are collected, where an overview of everything that exists in Russia is presented now, replenished again by all for the common good. The Moscow Museum, according to his idea, should be only the center of a thousand small museums scattered throughout all the villages, replenished from it and replenishing it.

And just as the Moscow Museum is Pre-Kremlin, i.e. is in close connection with the Kremlin shrines and the tombs of our common fathers on earth - the sovereigns - so the small village museums should become in the closest connection with the local church and cemetery of the village - be one wing of the church even in a purely architectural sense.

Again, Nikolai Fyodorovich personally put a lot of effort into collecting, during his time as a district teacher, the smallest facts of history, geography, ethnography, etc., from the most remote corners of the homeland, where fate threw him in his youth. He painstakingly collected all these small monuments of common activity, all the facts of current common life - in this respect he was like a stingy knight, in contrast to his personal attitude to his personal affairs and thoughts. He mercilessly scattered his thoughts in notes, articles in all publications (for example, an important fundamental article "Autocracy" was published in the newspaper "Askhabad")1. He welcomed the formation of local scientific archival commissions, contributed to the departments of the Imperial Archaeological Society, fussed over works like the history of some village or estate. All this was dear to him. This was material for museums - central and local. He wanted to involve everyone in his work. He had a project - proposed by him to the curators of libraries in the West - to exchange all publications, a project that was only partially realized, but after his death. In some matters, let us note, running ahead now, this idealist did not recognize private property, for example, copyright.

If, according to his theory, a small village museum should make up one wing of the church in each village, then Nikolai Fyodorovich schematically imagined a school as its other wing. He was a convinced supporter of universal education. Of course, he understood the latter as based on religion and the traditions of his native land; this was a conditio sine qua non2. And science itself, and in its development, should be democratized in the broadest possible way. With indescribable humor, he attacked its corporate-closed development, laughed at the learned owls sitting in cages made by themselves.

No! - he said - attract everyone to the common cause. Let the simple peasant bring you materials and let him, trained in research methods, pull others along with him, in this way the materials will increase, and their processing will be universal. The University will also be only a connecting center for a thousand small schools, just as the Moscow Museum is a center for small village museums.

It seems permissible to now bring up as a parallel one of Lomonosov's interesting projects: to entrust simple village children from the Academy of Sciences with collecting all the fossils that come to light along the banks of all Russian rivers after a friendly common effort during the spring flood.

If all these projects have not been realized and will not be realized, they are nevertheless very characteristic of Russian impulses to take on the whole matter together and to wage, perhaps for the last time, a great struggle against world evil, darkness and mutual alienation.

It was worth Nikolai Fyodorovich then transferring to the service, already in his old age, in the Archives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, when a project for a common cause was created here too. He looked at this Archive as a collection of all evidence of communication between peoples. We will not set out this project in detail due to lack of space. Let us note only that Fedorov's new project had much in common with the currently advanced idea of ​​"peace for the whole world." This is how the gray-haired idealist carried out his life, or rather, tried to carry out the idea of ​​a common cause - an idealist without a family, without any means, who died in 1903 in the city Mariinsky Hospital, surrounded by only a few admirers of his bright mind and kind heart. And our so-called liberal press did not note his death, did not honor his memory: this Russian idealist was too far from it. With even greater gratitude we dwell on one of his admirers - V.A. Kozhevnikov, who diligently collected all of Fedorov's articles, notes and letters, and created a monument to him in his work (Nikolai Fyodorovich Fedorov. An attempt to present his teachings based on published and unpublished works, correspondence and personal conversations. Moscow, 1908). In addition to this solid monograph, there is a publication of the philosopher's personal works (N. F. Fedorov. Philosophy of the Common Cause. His Articles, Thoughts, and Letters, Published under the Editorship of V. A. Kozhevnikov and N. P. Peterson. Volume I. Verny. 1907). We must be grateful to the authors of these works that these bright thoughts have not been lost on us. At present, Volume II of Fedorov's collected works is being prepared for publication. Unfortunately, we must say that until now all these works have been published "not for sale."

Having briefly described Fedorov's life, we will now move on to a more detailed exposition of his teaching.

Thus, N. F. Fedorov put forward the principle of the matter to as the only one that saves from the discrepancy between philosophy and life. This same cause for its activity must be universal. Only a universal cause, in the implementation of the eternal truths of the Gospel in life, can save everyone. Isolation, alienation is the original sin. This sin of alienation has left its mark on all attempts by individual systematizers to put forward some principle of their own that would unite all philosophical systems. Such attempts at unification have failed, at least in the West. Obviously, the root of evil lies very deep there. First of all, according to Nikolai Fedorovich, it lies in the isolation of the foundation of Western European culture - the Catholic Church - from the Universal Church. And perhaps the root of evil goes even further into the depths of the centuries. There, in hoary antiquity, Fedorov notes Socrates' deviation from the principle of universality. Socrates put forward the principle of a self-conscious personality, the principle: "know thyself!" And from the time of Socrates, Greek philosophy became the lot of the chosen ones, closed itself off in academies and learned circles. N. F. did not recognize, even in the era of dominant paganism, the need for philosophers to close themselves off. In his opinion, this was already a betrayal of the common cause. Let us follow N. F. in his analysis of the history of philosophy. He did not recognize the merits of the closed philosophers of the Socratic schools in preparing the ancient world for Christianity. The latter was an act of Divine will and did not owe anything to the Socratic philosophy of self-knowledge of the individual and self-improvement. All these Stoics and Peripatetics were powerless to put forward a common idea. The salvation of the world was indicated in the teaching of the Lord, Who, having created the Church, gave it the power of all-vivifying grace. The further process of human life and thought consisted, unfortunately, only in the gradual terrible fragmentation of the once united forces of humanity. True, N. F. highly valued the medieval period of philosophy and life in Europe as an attempt to create a Single City, but at the same time he noted that even in the wonderful world concept of the philosophy of Augustine, the forerunner and theorist of this period, alienation had crept in. After all, Augustine, N. F. sadly noted, allowed in his system the division of the Single City into God's and earthly, although he gave the former an advantage and unifying significance. This division was expressed in life - in the struggle of the popes with the emperors, a struggle that destroyed the cause of Christianity in the West. Thus, one extreme constantly called forth another... and the idea of ​​a common cause fell and fell... N. F. valued individual aspects of various, divergent teachings, but constantly emphasized the impossibility of these individual teachings putting forward a unifying scheme. Thus, he valued the Renaissance for its proclamation of the freedom of the human spirit from the extremes of medieval scholasticism, but... again, he stated that the bare freedom of the individual, proclaimed in the Renaissance, was fatally unable to bring happiness to people. This freedom, devoid of any defining moments, led only to the deification of man with all his passions. As a result, the end of the 15th century was defined as the era of the extreme decline of morality. In its depravity, this era cannot be compared with any other.

Further, the era of the Reformation, which turned people's attention to religion, should be considered (and was) a time of moral purification. But... again, this movement, which bore the characteristic name of Protestant, carried within itself the germ of decline. Protest cannot unite! And so, as a result, the Protestant movement itself began to fragment and fragment into countless sects, passionately at odds with each other. In the end, this only created a general disdain for religious questions... and thus Rationalism developed.

Rationalist philosophy, the philosophy of the new Europe, considers Descartes to be its founder. And what do we see? What foundations does he put forward? Yes, again the same ideas of alienation. Descartes, with his principle of "cogito- ergo sum", only emphasized more strongly the principle of personal being and understanding. Now the Christian form of this principle that Augustine still retained (fallor- ergo sum, i.e. I sin - therefore I exist) fell away.

Thus things went on and on, right up to our time. We will not bother with an exposition of Fedorov's opinions, although very interesting, regarding all the remarkable philosophers of the West. Let us use the example of himself, who especially valued radicals of thought, and go straight to the end of the development of Western philosophy. Here stand the significant figures of Nietzsche and Max Stirner, with his philosophy of the "unique and its property".

Nietzsche - this black prophet, in the words of Fedorov, laughed at all attempts before him at systematization in philosophy in the name of some principle. He pointed out that no matter what position we accept, each, with further development, leads to absurdity, and ...

Adventavit asinus

Pulcher et fortissimus!3

In the person of Nietzsche, the West said everything; all opinions were ridiculed by him, broken and alienated, fighting with each other and perished in an inglorious struggle. In the person of Nietzsche, the Buddhist element of pessimism, despair, came to its final self-development. I, the alienation that was hidden in the roots of European philosophy from the beginning. Fedorov did not consider the philosophy of supermanhood to be anything other than a cry of despair and madness. Nietzsche went mad... This was the necessary conclusion to the history of Western philosophy. Hartmann, who retained his sanity, committed suicide!

After them, naturally, nothing new appeared in the West. Neo-Kantianism is a rehash of the old. Only the teachings of James and Bergson are an attempt to fight rationalism, in the name of "experience" and "will".

What to do now? And... what should we, Russians, do, taking on this terrible legacy? Where is the light?

Naturally, this light, this point of support can be found only in the opposite of the terrible alienation - in unification.

This principle is the most remarkable of those put forward by N. F-ch. It covers all the others. We must unite philosophy with life. We must demand that philosophers be direct workers in life, educators of humanity! (Let us recall his project for the democratization of science and education.) The isolation of philosophical thought in the offices of scientists could only lead to and led to the discoloration of thought: isolation from the work weakened thought.

It is necessary, further, to unite philosophy with religion. Let religion enter practical life through philosophy. The Lord God Himself, communicating with Himself in Three Persons, gave us an example of mutual love of people for each other. So, let these three great areas be inseparable: religion, philosophy, life! There is no reason to see a contradiction between religion and philosophy! The latest research completely eliminates this position.

This is Fedorov's main idea. Everything that follows will already be a conclusion from it. One cannot help but admire this bold concept, but one cannot help but think about it. Let us see, following N. F-ch himself, what its implementation would lead to in practice. After all, Fedorov recognized only practical verification for all, even the most ingenious philosophical principles. Earlier, we already noted in passing that Fedorov denied the most necessary cases of alienation, for example, among pagan society. Now we note that his denial extends entirely to any alienation in Christian society.

He equally denies the rationality of the existence of both monasteries and academies. Why is it, he asks, that all decent people are convinced that the world is hopelessly “lying in evil”? Why do they distance themselves from life, locking themselves in monasteries or academies? After all, they, the alienated, are then given the study of some homiletics!

In Fedorov’s opinion, it is impossible to even think about the existence of some special science—theology. N. F. understood theology only as the practical application and fulfillment of the Savior’s covenants.

We present these thoughts only for information, but we cannot fully subscribe to them. In any case, this philosophy of the "common cause" is a characteristic indicator of the properties and inclinations of Russian thought. It reflects the broad scope of our Russian philosophers, the practicality of Russian thought... but also a certain anarchy of the Russian nature, which does not want to know trifles and strives entirely for the unattainable.

However, it seems very valuable that in Fedorov's system, since his teaching can be called that, Russian nihilism was overcome by Russian traditional religiosity. Fedorov did not develop into a well-known type of Russian anarchist, like Tolstoy, Kropotkin or Bakunin. He placed religion above all else, understanding it as a common cause of the entire human race, of all the "sons of God" in the struggle against evil.

The difference with the usual worldview in Fedorov is only that his worldview is more optimistic. He believed that it was possible for humanity to defeat world evil with united forces here on earth. He recalled the Russian proverb: "With peace and council we will defeat even the devil!" and called on humanity to unite around the Russian people in order to wage, perhaps for the last time, a world struggle for Good.

But this was precisely what required unification, the most complete one. Fedorov did not allow the possibility of singling out a ruling class - a spiritual class. He considered this a great sin on the part of the clergy. It must enter life, and not desert. He said this equally about the entire intelligentsia.

Only desertion from life by the ruling class of people who had appropriated the name of the clergy could plunge the rest of society, which for some reason had been given the special name of secular, into the troubles they were now enduring.

In this schism lies the root of the misfortunes of society, the so-called secular society, to the consideration of whose needs, according to Fedorov, we now proceed.

This unfortunate, separated or isolated, secular society has settled down to live according to legal paragraphs, having forgotten the general brotherhood. If this slogan (brotherhood), together with freedom and equality, is thought to be the basis of a cultural society, then in fact, of course, it is only a mockery of brotherhood. Legal paragraphs have long ago overcome brotherhood.

Fyodorov has hardly taken up arms against anyone with greater force, like against lawyers. They have replaced kinship with laws! They guard, like wolves, every good deed in order to enclose it in legal norms, to deaden and kill it. They are the evil vultures of all that is good!

Thanks to their activities, the idea of ​​brotherhood has been distorted into abstract humanism. The latter, however, "as ungodly and naturalistic... is a transition to a very specific animality." "The humanistic-cosmopolitan state... is an artificial, mechanical aggregate... of vagabonds who do not remember kinship," and not the sons of God.

Only such a social structure delimited by legal norms could give rise to the demand for rights: after all, every isolated subject, from his personal, non-fraternal point of view, must consider himself deprived of rights. "Rights, rights!" cries modern humanity and ultimately receives the so-called legal system, as if in mockery of itself.

It must be admitted, says Fedorov, that no rights, even the broadest, will save, will not give happiness, will not satisfy, until people stop looking at each other as enemies, competitors, etc.

Then the question arises before us: what to do? Should we not reject the laws right now? And here is what is very remarkable - Fedorov in this regard does not follow in the footsteps of Tolstoy. He believes that rejecting the legal, state and social system now, immediately, would only bring great troubles. It would be only one provocation of the great ideals of humanity.

Thus, N. F. asserted in his theory the existence of a modern legal system, but he asserted it only with a reservation, temporarily, until society changes radically through re-education, i.e. until this system itself becomes superfluous. He recognized both the state and the most extreme manifestation of its authority - he recognized military service. However, he believed that, while directly training soldiers, officers should point out to them that service in blood was required only now, temporarily, in the given state of society. Fedorov's mental gaze imagined a camp-school.

In particular, we will note Fedorov's characteristic demand, in parallel with the universal military service of the people, the demand for universal educational and upbringing service of the intelligentsia. No one can be free from it: each of us is obliged to leave behind several literate students of our own. This ordinary service is equally obligatory for both an academician and a graduate of a gymnasium. This is one unnecessary feature in the program of the common cause.

In general, we will note that N. F. shifted the center of gravity of his teaching to the re-education of people. However, if humanity is still forced, albeit temporarily, to live in a state system, it must choose the best forms of this system. He considered Autocracy to be such a best form. He considered the demand for rights and a constitution to be a rejection of the "common cause"; these demands reflected only the isolation of the intelligentsia from their native, paternal people, who remained with their Tsar-Anointed of God, i.e. who had a direct order from God to stand at the head of the common Christian cause, to lead it. If the constitution inevitably leads to the fragmentation of forces, to party spirit of all kinds, then the Autocracy contains elements of moral power, which has to lead the cause of education and re-education of the people and all of humanity. It is unreasonable, already for practical reasons, to renounce all the strength, all the power contained in the power of the Russian Autocrats: this must be used!

The Russian Autocrats must in the future unite the entire Christian society for the restoration of this teaching (Christian) in purity and the implementation of its principles in the life of all humanity. The Russian Autocracy already has merits in this regard. Our tsars were the first to raise the question of limiting, reducing the aimless horrors of war. The entire history of international law is associated with the names of Russian sovereigns. Catherine II raised the issue of "armed neutrality." Alexander I created the Holy Alliance of Christian Europe, remarkable in its idea, no matter how one looks at its actual implementation. Alexander II supported the issues of the Geneva Peace Conference, was, in essence, the creator of the first restrictions on the use of various types of explosive bullets, etc. Listing the issues he raised would lead too far. Let us just remember that Emperor Alexander III, who pursued a different policy, created the colossal military power of Russia, at the same time, with this very direction of his policy, more than anyone else contributed to the idea of ​​"peace for the whole world" - for which he remained in the memory of posterity with the title of Peacemaker. Finally, the famous Hague Peace Conference is again the work of the Russian Emperor. Based on all these considerations, Fedorov considered it possible to expect from the Russian Autocrats a powerful impetus to the "common cause" of all mankind. That is why he defined Autocracy as follows: “Autocracy is a common cause, the subject of which is the life of all humanity... its cause is sacred, extra-temple liturgy, brotherhood, i.e. the replacement of everything legal and economic with moral, familial.” We must recognize ourselves as sons of the Kingdom of God, and not citizens. With such a formulation of the Autocracy, any question about the rights of the Tsar or the people naturally disappears. N. F. said: "Not the people for the Tsar, and not the Tsar for the people, but the Tsar together with the people, as the executor of God's work, the work of all mankind."

It is clear how much such an understanding of the tasks of the political system is higher than the usual constitutional-legal one. N. F. believed that our Russian people still retain inexhaustible reserves of brotherly feelings. We only need to give them an outlet - and they will come out like a wave onto the arena of world history and wash away and tear down the miserable constitutional barriers.

Freedom has an enemy more dangerous than chains,

More terrible than violence, suffering and persecution,

That enemy is invulnerable: he is in the hearts of people;

He is everyone's innate ability to reconcile!

(Nadson)

"With this you will conquer!" said our thinker, namely, by strengthening and developing brotherly feelings.

This is also the main healing remedy in solving economic issues, which are so acute in modern capitalist society and are becoming increasingly acute. And so, moving on to the solutions to the economic problem proposed by our thinker, we will first of all, as we have done before, turn and see how he himself solved these issues. Let us recall his pension of 17 rubles 51 kopecks and note that, with all his senile infirmities, he found it possible to give away most of this pension, and at the same time he would say: "No matter how you spend money, it still remains, the damned things!" He limited his needs to the bare necessities... and turned out to be rich. True, we will note that he had neither a permanent home, nor a permanent table, nor a mattress, nor a pillow; his clothes were rags. And yet he considered it possible, from his beggarly position, to look down as if from above on humanity, tirelessly rushing about in pursuit of gold, and to repeat, half with contempt, half with regret, the words of Goethe's Gretchen:

Zum Golde drängt, am Golde hängt doch alles!

Ach, vir Armen!..4

Thus, the solution to the economic problem is closely connected with Fedorov's general views. Everything can be solved only by everyone, by common love and the internal purification of the individual himself. One cannot preach class discord. This is only a further step in the terrible "alienation". Socialism is only the reverse side of capitalism. It is only a new struggle, a new waste of humanity's energy - and inevitably with a sad result. After all, the accumulation of wealth and even the achievement of simple contentment "have not eliminated for anyone either the dull, deadening boredom, or the fear of possible poverty... or the fear of the future life." "Even through gold tears flow!" he repeated the popular proverb. And one must in no way mix the evangelical sermon with the socialist one; one must not see Christ as a social reformer. "For Christ, poverty is no more an evil than wealth is a good," he said. He praised the council of one of the American universities, which refused to accept the richest gift for education from Carnegie, from a billionaire confident in the omnipotence of his millions to transform and enlighten the world, from a billionaire who wrote a book, "The Gospel of Wealth," glorifying gold and its power. 6 But of course, in all these assessments of material goods by F<odorov> one should not see his contempt for them. No!.. after all, the philosopher-preacher of the "common cause" was at the same time one of the first to call upon the entire intelligentsia precisely to practical work... he called upon them to enter precisely into life, into practice - therefore, and, by the way, to create those same material goods.

Thus, his contempt for material goods must be understood only as exclusively material goods that have broken their connection with spiritual goods - goods that, if we are allowed to personify them, boast of their omnipotence. And so Fedorov exposes their complete insolvency in such an alienated state. But of course, we repeat, he is far from groundless idealism, especially inappropriate in our capitalist era. He did not consider the feat of non-acquisitiveness, which he took upon himself, obligatory for everyone. He only constantly emphasized and stated the complete insolvency of those who rely exclusively on material goods. He only, proceeding from his firmly established idea of ​​the “common cause,” stated in advance the future failure of both the socialist movement and the constitutional one. After all, their root is isolation, alienation, and their conclusions are the demand for constitutional guarantees in the hated legal paragraphs and the preaching of class discord and struggle among the socialists. No!.. — he said — struggle cannot save. Unification is needed.

Fedorov did not deny either the legal or economic system. It is necessary to preserve this temporarily. It is necessary to use the benefits of capitalism, its power for the “common cause.” After all, socialists do not reject capitalist society either. They are waiting for its development into a world economy. Fedorov, however, inserted a significant corrective. He rejected the possibility of proceeding exclusively from economic provisions and goals. He said: do not forget everything! Do not forget the spiritual side of the matter. Do not forget that "Man lives by bread alone."

Economic issues must be resolved without forgetting about higher economics. Based on ethical requirements, it is necessary to seek salvation, for example, for poor peasants, in order to support their economy, family, this hearth of society, the state and the Church. It is impossible to simply state that the peasantry is weaker than the large landowner and, therefore, is doomed to perish. No! In it, in the peasantry, there are other forces, its tasks are high, and it will inevitably overcome its crisis in the capitalist system. These special forces, special goals are great, and this will manifest itself. In a word, one cannot reject spiritual values ​​in the peasant world. And it is useless to reject them. The living will remain alive. Therefore, it is impractical to proceed from an exclusively economic point of view.

Such are the views of N. F<edorov> on economic issues, views that are fully consistent with his main idea - unity. True, we encounter here one negative side of Russian thought, which is at the same time positive. This is the excessive breadth of constructions, and therefore vagueness. It remains unclear how, in particular, to use capitalism, what forms of peasant land ownership to support. These are all just hints... Fedorov believed that the common efforts of everyone would get to the details.

All these common efforts should go along the path of fighting the only enemy of humanity - blind nature. This is a new, important thought. Nature, according to his definition, is a temporary enemy, but an eternal friend. People have spoiled nature, and it does not give us everything it can. We ourselves have spoiled ourselves in many ways and do not know how to take what we need and what nature can give us.

And so all our efforts must be directed to the fight against the inert forces of rich nature and to the restoration of normal relations with it. If all the forces that are spent in the internecine war of human brothers were directed to the struggle for everyone, then the life of people would soon improve.

It is interesting to draw a parallel with the Russian anarchist Kropotkin in understanding the work of humanity on earth. Kropotkin considers all products of culture, all capital, movable and immovable, to be the result of the common work of all people. The thoughts here are again the same, Russian. The same idea of ​​peace, community, unity. But Kropotkin made a purely anarchist, narrow conclusion. Therefore, a communist revolution is needed; everything must be taken away for everyone. Let us compare how far Fyodorov stands from this one-sidedness, how he, like an eagle, soars above the preaching of revolution, how he expands the concept of material goods, how he considers it necessary to temporarily allow the existence of the present system ... and what horizons of greatness he opens up to humanity as a result of the common friendly work of everyone!!!

Only Orthodox Christianity could give him all this: the greatness of the idea of ​​the future (compare the communist republic and... the Kingdom of God), and a huge reserve of strength to work here, on our sinful earth, to work within the existing framework, only caring about their spiritualization, about the use of both the political power of the Autocracy and the economic power of capitalism, to work, not forgetting about the shining star ahead of the general bliss of people who recognized themselves as the sons of the Kingdom of God. In conclusion, we must say a few words about our attitude to the presented teaching. With all our sympathy for Fedorov's philosophy of the common cause, we could not help but note our divergence from him on various occasions when presenting his views. May the shadow of a remarkable Russian man not lament that here, parting with him - a brilliant representative of Russian thought - we once again note this divergence from him. Let us apply his favorite method to his philosophy again, let us see what he dreams of as a result of applying his philosophy in life. And so, with some amazement and even horror, we see his dream of the actual disappearance of death as a result of the common efforts of all mankind on earth. He thought that it was possible, through the common brotherly efforts of people, to heal all the wounds that people had already inflicted on nature and on themselves. Perhaps, he said, it would then be possible to return nature to its virgin powers. There would be no more decay and destruction. It is possible that the common cause of mankind under the guidance of the Holy Church will also smooth over all the sins of the past, bring back to life what was destroyed, resurrect and revive the dead. The idea of ​​a general resurrection from the dead here on earth, by the power of the earth, by the power of mankind itself, will seem blasphemous to an Orthodox! It will seem blasphemous—we know that. But… let us not forget the bright idealism of this most intelligent man. Let us remember that he did not think of any work as possible without the guidance and help of God. Let us remember that he himself was the most zealous Christian in obedience to all the covenants of the Holy Church, in the fulfillment of all its regulations. Then we will understand that this bold thought did not flow from its contradiction with the truths of Christianity; on the contrary, he only drew inspiration from here to carry out to the end his main thought, perhaps incorrect from its basic point of view.

After all, he saw the root of evil in alienation, whereas evil is a category of a special order, and alienation is only one of the forms of life in general. Indeed, evil is characterized by its alienation from the Common Holy Cause, but—let us not forget that since people have given themselves over to evil in large numbers, it is already characteristic for some chosen ones to emphasize their alienation from evil.

Our thinker understood what was happening in the world in a too Russian, practical and external way. He imagined evil as external alienation, forgetting that there is external alienation with internal communication at the same time with everyone. Thus, a holy hermit, withdrawing from the world, is at the same time in internal spiritual communication with all Christians. It also happens the other way around: a person communicates externally with everyone, but remains alone. This is characteristic of too many to give examples. And it seems to us that such and such internal alienation (especially if it is prolonged excessively) rather coincides with a person’s being in the realm of evil…

So, practically, in a Russian way, simply understanding the category of alienation, Fedorov could only bring it closer to the category of evil. Naturally, he then imagined the possibility of deliverance from evil just as simply, namely, through communication, forgetting that this communication can be of different orders. Hence his excessive hopes for the results of the common cause. He idealized this common cause too much, and, let’s say, even impermissibly, without distinguishing its different types in it.

However, this should also be attributed only to the healthy idealism, the vitality of the Russian hero of thought, the great Russian dreamer. And let’s not forget that we now emphasize again and again that N.F. Fedorov thought of the common cause under the guidance of only the Holy Church. This can be a significant justification for his boundless optimism.

And no matter how imperfect the main thoughts and conclusions of our thinker were, let us still remain grateful to his memory, remembering that he was a Russian thinker, with all the merits and demerits inherent to a Russian thinker, the breadth of his thought and some of its anarchy, justified by its special practicality.

And most importantly, let us not forget that he overcame the existing shortcomings of his thought in many ways with his Christian consciousness. Let us remember how much higher he was than a whole series of misguided Russian thinkers and let us remain grateful to his memory, who gave us a brilliant example of Russian thinking.
COMMENTS

Published from: Svetoch i dnevnik pisatelya. Monthly illustrated literary and scientific magazine for everyone. Moscow, 1913. No. 1. Pp. 123-129; No. 2. Pp. 57-65. An expanded and supplemented text of the work by S. I. Matveyev, published as a separate brochure in Kharkov in 1912.

The work was written by S. I. Matveyev based on Volume I of the "Philosophy of the Common Cause" and the book by V. A. Kozhevnikov, which the author actively used to present both the facts of Fedorov's biography and his main ideas.

1 The article "Autocracy" was published in the summer of 1901 in the Turkestan newspaper "Askhabad", but this publication was carried out by Peterson without Fedorov's knowledge (for more details, see: Fedorov. Dop., 168).

2 "A Necessary Condition" (Latin).

3 The Donkey Appears in All Its Beauty and Strength (Latin).

4 Literal translation of a quote from Goethe's Faust (Margarita's words in the Evening scene of Part I of the poem): "After all, everything rests on gold and strives for gold! Ah, we are poor!"

5 Kozhevnikov wrote specifically about the ideas of E. Carnegie, expressed in the book "L'Evangile de le Richesse" (Paris, 1891), in his work on Fedorov (Kozhevnikov, 165-166, 171). Fedorov's statements about Carnegie (Carnegie, in the thinker's vocalization), see: Fedorov. III, 437, 519; IV, 443, 498).