(Philosopher of Militarism and Enemy of Peace)
"You assert," says Zarathustra (to the Black Tsar), "that a good goal sanctifies even war; but I say that only the good of war sanctifies every goal."
"War and courage have accomplished more great deeds than love for one's neighbor."
"By rejecting war, we reject the great in life."

What sadness would Nietzsche have felt upon reading the manifesto of the White Tsar calling for universal peace, and what joy would he have felt upon listening to the warlike speeches of the Black Tsar? The activity of the Black Prophet begins immediately after the war and the victory of the Black Kingdom over the Non-White, as a manifestation of the upsurge caused by this victory. Germany, intoxicated with blood, produced in the person of Nietzsche a small book, "On the Origin of Tragedy," which explained the origin of the whole world from the spirit of intoxication. The author himself, who still recognized Schopenhauer-Buddhist compassion, participated in the war as a medic. The activity of the Prophet of Darkness ends with the depiction of the hero of the new "culture of the tragic worldview". The goal of Nietzsche's first work was not to explain the past, not to understand it; the task of this work was to proclaim a new culture and to cause its appearance, that is, to cause the "culture of the tragic worldview". The future hero of this worldview is only the forerunner of the Antichrist. The Antichrist sees goodness and happiness in strength and power; Nietzsche believes them in the same way; therefore, for the philosopher of the Black Kingdom or for the Black Prophet, the Antichrist is the ideal. The question inevitably arises: is there not a historical connection between the course of development of the Black Philosopher's thought and the dark events of his time, when the Ecumenical Council declared the Pope infallible, and the Franco-Prussian War deprived him of secular power, when Germany, also striving to concentrate power, became the founder of militarism, which oppresses the entire world to this day? It is hardly possible to even doubt that such a connection exists between this world tragedy and Nietzsche's work, which explains only the aesthetic genesis of tragedy by its title, but in fact tries to explain the tragedy of the entire world process, its final destruction. If the Black Prophet was the first theoretical interpreter of the "culture of tragic worldview", then the Black Tsar is already, as it were, the executor of his predecessor's project: what Nietzsche only dreamed of, Wilhelm is already implementing. In 1898 we see the emergence of two new world empires: in the spring, the Eastern Ocean, American empire, and in the autumn, the German-Turkish empire, which, since the solemn conclusion of friendship between Wilhelm and Islam, extends from the Atlantic to the Philippines. The foundation of the German empire, the so-called "cultural struggle" it launched, and finally, the emergence of the new German-Turkish empire - all this was and is covered by the mask of tolerance. To have no respect for anything, to have nothing sacred, and to show respect both to the Pope and to the Caliph - that is tolerance, callousness and falsehood, those are the essential properties of this false virtue! After all, Napoleon himself declared himself a friend of the Mohammedans! But Wilhelm Khan imprinted his friendship with Islam on stone in the city of Cain and Baal (Baalbek), and in Damascus he saw from Mount Soallekim the paths over which Soallekim rules; he also foresaw the final result of friendship with Mohammedanism; while declaring his friendship, he already raised his heel on the head of his new friends. This means that tolerance is not only heartlessness and a lie, but also treachery. By his tolerance the new Antichrist awakens Mohammedan fanaticism throughout the East and prepares for the next century new invasions, which he himself predicted, and new pogroms.