"What does your conscience tell you?" asks the renewer of the old commandment of pagan discord, and without waiting for an answer, decides: "You must become who you are!" Meanwhile, to the amazement of our arch-prodigal son, all the answers to the proposed question begin with what everyone has in common: everyone agrees, unanimously calls themselves sons, and even those who do not remember kinship do not deny that they, too, had fathers, that they, too, are sons, grandsons, great-grandsons, descendants. Even the enemy of unity himself, speaking of hereditary abilities, recognizes fatherland and sonship. But when this self-proclaimed legislator turns to the conscience of other people, he forgets to turn to his own. And thanks to such oblivion, he turns from a willful legislator into an obedient tool of the Delphic demon and commands that "everyone must create his own truth, his own morality." Meanwhile, the concept of "son" contains both the general truth and the highest morality, uniting everyone in a common paternal and filial cause! For sons, death is not the limit of either love or duty to their fathers. The death of fathers unites all sons in one common love, in one common duty. The sons' awareness of the involuntary displacement of their fathers creates for the former the duty of uniting against the blind force of nature that displaces them, in order to recreate this insensitive, killing force into one controlled by the reason and love of sons. It is this unification that makes and can make each person "what he is", if only he has not rejected, like Nietzsche, the fatherland, and draws the law from the pure childlike, filial nature, and not from the impure Schopenhauerian lust, which Schopenhauer himself calls will and which in Dionysian intoxication also leads to lust or to a corrupted instinct for domination over one's own kind, and through this to the denial of the fatherland and brotherhood. The thinker who has lost the filial feeling, telling the story of his life, will narrate its wanderings and only in returning to the fathers will he find himself as a son. Only from sons can a brotherhood be created, and not a "herd", as the preacher of forgetting fathers and of man's belonging to the category of cattle stubbornly thinks. When Zarathustra drives his disciples away from himself, he frees them only from his Nietzschean error, but does not indicate where those he has driven out can find themselves; he condemns them to eternal wandering.

All ancient philosophy was such a wandering and came to a complete denial of truth, when Pilate, having asked the question "what is truth," did not even wait for an answer, because he was already firmly convinced in advance that there is no truth. Modern European philosophy repeated the wanderings and came to the same denial, because the object of knowledge of theoretical reason, the object of the curiosity of the learned class, did not become the object of the business of all. This object, so long as it has not passed into the project of a universal cause, is a powerful but blind world ruler, but by no means a "great reason." Even our body, which we call "ours," is in reality not ours at all, because it is not governed by reason; and our very reason is not great, but small (and will remain so), until the sons unite in knowledge and in management, i.e. the subject of knowledge of theoretical reason, both themselves and the whole universe.

Marginal note: Let every philosophy be a manifestation of the personality of the philosopher! And philosophy would be truth, and the personality would be a good individuality, if both did not indulge in alienation, wandering, and therefore in error. (For the prodigal son to return to his father means to go from the path of error to the path of truth), but to stagnate in one's errors and to be passive in one's sorrows and illnesses means to renounce one's fathers, despite the obvious [disastrous consequences] of wandering.