I

Just as in Solovyov, under the "justification of good"1 it turns out to be a condemnation and denial of only vice, so it is with Tolstoy. Although under the guise of aesthetics ("What is art?"2) Tolstoy wrote ethics, nevertheless he knows only negative good, knows what it is not, and does not know what it is. Under art, Tolstoy understands only the transmission of feelings from one to another, and not the realization of what everyone carries within himself in a thought-over and felt form, if only he is a true son of man, carrying within himself the images of his parents and ancestors, as it should be, and not a prodigal son, as is usually the case, whose heart is turned to things, property. Moreover, sincerely or insincerely, this passion is usually covered up by concern for children, for the future, i.e., for the continuation of an ephemeral and aimless existence. Tolstoy sees the goal of art not in the realization of what the son of man bears within himself, but in unification in one feeling, the content of which he does not know, and when he calls this feeling, out of routine, fraternal, he forgets that people are brothers only by fathers, ancestors, and having forgotten their fathers, they become strangers, and, consequently, what Tolstoy calls fraternal is not fraternal at all. That Tolstoy's happiness is more ethics than aesthetics is evident from the fact that he does not recognize beauty, and he would apparently like to recognize goodness - but what goodness?.. Goodness, says Tolstoy, "cannot be defined by anyone." But goodness cannot be defined by Tolstoy because he allows only negative goodness. If the commandments "do not kill" or "do not fight" (if you like it better), do not commit adultery, do not steal, do not bear false witness, do not sue, i.e. do not quarrel, etc., are fulfilled, then there will be no evil, and moreover, evil only inflicted by people on each other, and it will be possible to say what is not good, in which there is no good, but it will be impossible to say what it is, in what good consists. We can define good negatively, but to give it a positive definition, according to Tolstoy, is impossible. If, however, there is no murder, i.e. they do not take life, if there is no adultery (we take this in the broadest sense), i.e. if they do not give life to others, taking it from themselves, or if they do not take life from themselves, not giving it even to others (prostitution); if they do not steal, i.e. take away the means of life; false testimony can also lead to the deprivation of life and, in any case, leads, like any quarrel, to the weakening of life and the approach of death. What will remain if these commandments are fulfilled, which eliminate only evil, prescribing not even the preservation, but only the non-taking of life - life will still remain. Thus, even by the negative path we come to the definition of what good is4 - good is life. Good negatively will be only the non-taking of life, and positively - the preservation and return of life. Good is the preservation of life for the living and the return of it to those losing and having lost life. Thus, even from what Tolstoy preaches, according to strict logic it follows that good consists in the resurrection of the dead and the immortality of the living. Everyone must admit this conclusion - or else let them prove the illogicality of this conclusion. Having admitted the logicality of the conclusion, to admit the preservation and return of life only to the extent that this is supposedly possible means to allow oneself arbitrariness and to set limits to good at one's own will, which is the greatest evil, a crime against all the dead and the living; it means to allow arbitrariness like Tolstoy, who said that good supposedly "cannot be defined by anyone"; and yet, if he did not ascribe to himself absolute authority, he should have admitted only his own impotence (and perhaps only a lack of courage) to define what good is, and not say that it cannot be defined by anyone. One cannot help but notice, however, that in asserting that good cannot be defined by anyone, Tolstoy himself, at least twice, defines what good is. Incidentally, Tolstoy sees good, as was said above, in the realization of the fraternal unity of people, and this without any relation to the deceased fathers, according to whom only we are brothers. And yet, only for the realization of the good required by strict logic, and at the same time by childish feeling, i.e., filial and daughterly love, in fulfillment of Christ's commandment "be like children," i.e., like sons, like daughters, can the "brotherly unity of people," i.e., sons and daughters, be realized; only in fulfillment of the duty of resurrection can the brotherly unity of people be realized, because for the fulfillment of this duty it is necessary to unite people as rational beings in the work of understanding the blind force that bears hunger, ulcers and death, in order to transform it from blind to one controlled by reason, from deadly to life-giving; and this is precisely what lies without which all the arts prove powerless to establish brotherly unity, for as long as "half of humanity is starving," there can be no brotherly relations between people. Even if art were to convince part of humanity to voluntarily starve itself to death in order to save each other, part from hunger, then those who have starved themselves to death will, of course, act in a brotherly manner, and those who have accepted such a sacrifice and remained alive - what should we call their act?

It is only fair to say that everything Tolstoy proposes for unification has already been tested by Church Christianity, for in the temple the Christian Church united all the arts for the purpose of acting with them in their entirety, and yet this did not lead to brotherhood. There have been so many attempts to establish brotherhood, without paying attention to the reasons that make people not brothers, i.e., sow enmity between them, that history has lost count of such attempts.

In essence, there is nothing wrong in the definition of art as "the transmission of a strong feeling experienced by some person from the people"; this definition is extremely limited and only formal, and yet in this same definition, without limiting itself to one form, one could include all the content and all the means that art can have. Art in its essence is not only the transmission, but the realization by all means, by all the forces that the sons and daughters of men in their totality can command, the realization of that expectation or desire which is aroused under the influence of the strongest feeling that people can experience, under the influence of the feeling caused by the death of those closest to them, i.e., parents, i.e., a feeling as common to all people as death is common to all, which is why it can unite everyone. The transmission of feeling by those who feel more strongly to those who feel less strongly has only a temporary significance and does not contain any great importance, because death has no need of eloquent interpreters to exert a powerful effect of unification, especially if newer and newer means are acquired for influencing the deadly force. Only in the matter of returning life to all the dead can all the living be united, without which no eloquence and no artistic means of fraternal unity can produce. All temptations, the totality of which can be seen at World Exhibitions, serve as an opposition to this unification. What art can conquer this exhibition, which has drawn all the arts into itself?
II

In our time, according to Tolstoy, the purpose of art is clear and definite; the task of Christian art is to realize the fraternal unity of people. Yes, it would be clear and definite if instead of the word people there were sons of men, then fraternal would have a direct and precise meaning. In the ordinary sense, understandable to everyone, starting with children, brotherhood is based on the fatherland, only by our fathers are we brothers, brotherhood without the fatherland is incomprehensible and the fraternal unity of sons can be complete only in the fatherly work. But Tolstoy does not mention fathers, if he does not deny fathers, then in any case he ignores them. On what is his fraternal unity of people based? True, natural, real brotherhood, complete brotherhood, is brotherhood by fatherland, but there is also brotherhood on other grounds, there is, for example, brotherhood in arms. But brotherhood in arms also exists for the defense of the fatherland, and if arms are turned to salvation from hunger, from crop failures — as has been proposed since 1891 — in that case arms will no longer be destructive and will become an instrument of universal brotherhood, and then not only will there be no need for disarmament, which is impossible, but it will be necessary to involve everyone and for life in the fulfillment of military service, since this service, saving from hunger as one cause of death, cannot ignore diseases, which also lead to death. While saving the living from death, one cannot forget those who have already died, i.e. this will be brotherhood for the fatherly cause. Brotherhood is not only in arms; brotherhood is also in craft, occupation or work, but for universal brotherhood it is necessary that the occupation be universal; for unification it is even necessary that everyone have one common cause, and only in this case the brotherhood will not be empty, idle; such an occupation can be agriculture, but agriculture requires a return from the cities to the villages to the ashes of the fathers, and it (agriculture) is at the present time the conversion of the ashes of the fathers into the food of the descendants. However, such use of the ashes of the fathers is only temporary, not final, a separation of worlds.

So, if the weapon that takes life is converted into an instrument of agriculture, an instrument that provides the means for maintaining and returning life, then brotherhood in such weapons is a true brotherhood, an alliance of sons for returning life to the fathers, and at the same time this brotherhood is a brotherhood in common occupation and labor.

Brotherhood can also be in food: the well-known expression "classmates", "fellow-shoes", "fellow-cups"; and Christianity has combined food as a condition of life, existence with the remembrance of the dead. This combination of nourishment with remembrance in the strict, direct sense means that the excess of strength given by nourishment to sons should be used to replenish the loss of strength of aging and dying fathers and to restore life to the dead. In communion, this reminder is made to those who have an excess of strength, provided by nutrition, is currently used for birth, for growth. Histotherapy and organotherapy are, one might say, a weak beginning of the conversion of the filial surplus of forces to replenish the loss of fathers' forces.

But Tolstoy can say that he recognizes brotherhood not by fatherland, but by humanity. In this case, in order to understand the meaning of brotherhood by humanity, it is necessary to define what a person is. Previously, a person meant mortal; but this definition is not exact and even incorrect. In the strict sense, a person is not mortal, but the son of deceased fathers, i.e. we know death not in ourselves, but only by previous cases, mortal is an induction, not a deduction. If a person is the son of deceased fathers, then we again return to the fatherland, and death, of course, in this case should lead to unification, but to unification for what?

If man is a verbal being, as opposed to speechless, to which animals belong, then the association will be a literary or speaking society. But if such an association is called a brotherhood, does it exclude hostility? However, in order for this association to be universal, there must be an association in the language of all peoples, and an association not in an artificial language, like Volapuk or Esperanto, but in a natural language, i.e., ancestral. Linguistics, the science that studies all languages, cannot have any other application than the development of a common language for all peoples; at present there is a root dictionary of languages ​​of Aryan origin, and there will, of course, be a root dictionary of all languages. The study of the roots of words through compulsory education will spread everywhere, and the study of one's own and foreign languages ​​will lead to the knowledge of what is common, related, paternal, ancestral in them. In the alphabet itself, syllables and syllables will be replaced by common roots and will thereby give meaning to them. In creating a common language in this way, we will necessarily approach the ancestral language, which will come into use, however, only as all people master the common work; and this work can only be the work of the fatherland. Thus, real unification in language also leads to the fatherland.

If man is a rational being, then the unification or brotherhood will be a learned society (but even if it were possible to unite everyone in knowledge and this unification were universal, nevertheless it would not exclude hostility and would obviously not be fraternal). Only filial feeling, common to all, gives knowledge a goal, i.e. unites people in the knowledge of the force that kills fathers, reveals their (people's) souls, unites them in mutual knowledge and, making them brothers in the deepest sense of the word, leads them to the return of life to the dead.

But this is impossible, Tolstoy will say. Although we, like him, do not know why this is impossible, we will not assert that the resurrection will take place; but it is already true that if we do not all unite in the work of resurrection, in an undoubtedly brotherly work, then we will not be brothers, and if man is a moral being, then in order to remain moral he must either return life to the dead, or die himself, but to survive the death of his father, recognizing the impossibility of resurrection, means not to be a son, not to be a brother, not to be, therefore, a moral being.

They also call man a burial being, finding that burial is a distinctive feature, exclusively inherent in man alone. The original meaning of burial, funeral service (exorcism), ablution, as is known, was resuscitation. Now this meaning has been lost, and even the word "funeral" is used not in the sense of resuscitation, but in the sense of hopelessly lost. But the word son of man has also lost its meaning and even gone out of use and has been replaced by the meaningless man. With this loss, all the demands connected with the filial feeling, which also caused burial in the sense of resurrection, have also lost their meaning. By replacing the definite son of man with the indefinite man, we have deprived ourselves of the opportunity to say who our common enemy is, what our common cause is. If our common cause consists in eradication, in liberation from the misfortunes common to all, then our age does not know or recognize any common cause at all. In the same way, our age does not know and does not even want to know the common enemy of all people, because blind, natural force, which is the common enemy of all, cannot be made to feel its hatred. Our age also does not understand love, just as it does not understand Christianity, because love for some (such as the poor) usually hides hatred for others (the rich). A complete misunderstanding of Christianity is evident from the fact that Christ is called not the son of man (as he called himself), but a man; they know an abstract God, and not the God of their fathers; they do not recognize the commandment “be like children,” i.e. like sons, like daughters, although it is in it, in fact, that the greatest commandment is contained, from it flows. All this has led to the fact that by brotherhood they understand the union not of sons, but simply of people, i.e. good, non-hostile relations between people. The unknown of a common cause, the unknown of a common enemy is the most characteristic feature of our time, our century. In the person who finished this century, who must be recognized as Tolstoy, this obscurity, ambiguity, uncertainty is especially obvious, and it is this that led him to preach “non-action”. […]
NOTES

First published: Put. Paris, 1933. No. 40. Pp. 3-15. Reproduced from the edition: Works. Moscow, 1982.

Fedorov, Nikolai Fedorovich (1829-1903) — philosopher, founder of Russian cosmism; utopian thinker, critic, publicist. After studying at the Tambov gymnasium, he continued his education at the Richelieu Lyceum in Odessa, in the office department; suddenly interrupts his studies in 1851. Then teaches at the Lipetsk District School, and for 15 years teaches history and geography in district towns in Russia. From 1869, he was a librarian at the Chertkovskaya Library in Moscow, and from 1874, at the Moscow Public and Rumyantsev Museums. In 1898, he retired, and in his last years he worked in the archives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. For some time, he lived with his student N.P. Peterson in Voronezh, then in Askhabad (1897-1900). He died in Moscow, in the Mariinsky Hospital for the Poor, and is buried in the cemetery of the Skorbyashchensky Monastery. Fedorov's grave was demolished in 1929, and a sports ground appeared in place of the cemetery; thus, Fedorov's project of "turning cemeteries into promenades" was ironically fulfilled. Fedorov is the author of the project "Philosophy of the Common Cause" (resurrection of deceased generations; destruction of death; regulation of nature; exploration of the Cosmos; disclosure of theoanthropurgical possibilities in history as a divine-human dialogue). Fedorov attracted the attention of and influenced most philosophers and writers-thinkers of the Silver Age, brought to life an entire movement that is experiencing its second birth in our days.

Works: Works. Moscow, 1982; Works: In 4 volumes. Moscow, 1995-1998. Vol. 1, 2; Goethe's "Faust" and the folk legend about Faust // Context-1975. Moscow, 1977; From "Philosophy of the Common Cause". Novosibirsk, 1983.

See about him: Bibliographies of extensive lists of works about Fedorov, see: Soviet Bibliography. 1990. No. 6. P. 62-65; Started. 1993. No. 1. P. 153-156. From recent works: Gacheva A.G. People and intelligentsia in the teachings of N.F. Fedorov // People and intelligentsia. M., 1990. S. 51-57; Nikitin V. A. Vladimir Solovyov and Nikolai Fedorov // Symbol. 1990. No. 23. P. 279-300; It's him. N. Fedorov and Orthodoxy // Beginnings. 1991. No. 3. P. 14-21; “Common Cause”: Sat. reports presented at the I All-Union Fedorov Readings. M., 1990; Russian Cosmism: Based on the Materials of the II and III All-Union Fedorov Readings. Moscow, 1990. Part 1-2; Semenova S. G. Nikolai Fedorov: The Creativity of Life. Moscow, 1990; Hagemeister M. Nikolaj Fedorov: Studien zu Life, Work und Wirkung. MЭnchen, 1989; Ibid. Russian Cosmism in the 1920s and Today // The Occult in Russian and Soviet Culture / Ed. by Bornice Elatzer Rosenthal. Cornell Univ. Press. Itaca and London, 1997. P. 185-207; Cosmism and the New Thinking in the West and the East: Materials of the International Scientific Conference. June 29 - July 2, 1999. St. Petersburg, 1999.

There is a whole literature on the relationship between Tolstoy and Fedorov. See, in particular: Peterson, N. P. N. F. Fedorov and his book "The Philosophy of the Common Cause" in contrast to L. N. Tolstoy's teaching "on non-resistance" and other ideas of our time. Verny, 1912; Abramovich, N. Tolstoy's Christ // Novoye Vino. 1913. No. 2. pp. 10-12; Skatov, N. N. Leo Tolstoy and Nikolai Fedorov // Ogonyok. 1978. No. 37; Ditto. Nikolai Fedorov about Leo Tolstoy // Lit. studies. 1989. No. 3. pp. 168-172; Nikitin, V. A. Tolstoy and N. F. Fedorov. Tolstoy's God-seeking and God-fighting // Prometheus. 1980. No. 12. pp. 113-138; Semenova S. G. On an ideological and philosophical dialogue: Leo Tolstoy and N. F. Fedorov // Sever. 1980. No. 2. Pp. 115-128.

Fedorov and Tolstoy had known each other since October 1881. In a November 1881 letter, Tolstoy wrote to V. I. Alekseev (first a follower of N. V. Tchaikovsky, then a Tolstoyan and, since the summer of 1877, a teacher of Tolstoy's eldest son Sergei): "This is the librarian of the Rumyantsev Library. Remember, I told you. He drew up a plan for the common cause of all mankind, the goal of which is the resurrection of all people in the flesh. Firstly, it is not as crazy as it seems. (Do not be afraid, I have never shared his views, but I have understood them so that I feel able to defend these views against any other belief that has an external goal. Secondly and most importantly, thanks to this belief, he is the purest Christian in life.) When I tell him about fulfilling Christ's teaching, he says: yes, that is obvious, and I know that he fulfills it. - He is 60 years old, he is a beggar and gives everything away, he is always cheerful and meek" (63, 80-81). According to the hypothesis of N.K. Gudziy, the prototype of one of the heroes of "Resurrection" was either Peterson or P.A. Nikiforov - both Fedorovites (for a commentary, see the book: Emelyanov B.V., Khomyakov M.B. Nikolai Fedorov and his "Philosophy of the Common Cause" // Philosophical Library of the Teacher. Pskov, 1994. Issue 3. P. 92). Fedorov closely followed the work of his, as he believed, opponent, so that an entire volume could be compiled from the articles he wrote about Tolstoy. In addition to those mentioned above, the following works are known: "Tolstoy and Brotherly Unity"; "'Inaction' or Fatherly and Brotherly Work?"; Archival texts (according to the above-mentioned brochure by B.V. Emelianov and M.B. Khomyakov): "On Russian Literature and Tolstoy"; "Philosophical Notes on Tolstoy"; "Summary of Tolstoy's Philosophy"; "On Articles on Tolstoy"; "To the Panegyrist of Death, the Greatest Hypocrite of Our Time". In addition, many comments on Tolstoy and Tolstoyanism are scattered throughout the texts of most of Fedorov's major works.

1 According to Fedorov, "Justification of Good" (1897) undertakes something that good does not need, namely, philosophical rehabilitation. A. Blok expressed similar bewilderment in his time.

2 Tolstoy's treatise "What is Art?" published in "Problems of Philosophy and Psychology" (1897. Book 5; 1898. Book 1), but Fedorov was familiar with his ideas from oral conversations with the author.

3 Fedorov considers Tolstoy's ethics to be normative, in the spirit of the Age of Enlightenment, i.e. as an ethics of prohibitions and suggestive teaching.

4 ... even by negative means we come to a definition of what good is... - Here the type of argumentation that is usually considered apophatic (definition = affirmation through negation) is used, and this apophaticism is associated with the variety represented by the tradition of "learned ignorance", and even more specifically - by Nicholas of Kuzan (with his image of the "simpleton"). In Russian philosophical classics, we observe its action from G. Skovoroda to S. Frank and M. Bakhtin. See the characteristic title of Fedorov's treatise, "A Note from the Unlearned to the Learned..." against the background of the title of Tolstoy's article, "Who Should Learn to Write from Whom, the Peasant Children from Us or We from the Peasant Children" (1862) (8, 301-324). Ironically, our adherents of secular philosophical apophatics (a method that comes from a very respectable theological tradition) are truly "uneducated": neither Fedorov, nor Tolstoy, nor, by the way, Bakhtin received a systematic education. The danger of this method in its secular version is that the inversion of the opponent's judgment is capable of reconciling anything with anything. For the history of the apophatic method, see: Bulgakov S.N. The Uneven Light. Moscow, 1917.