January 5, 1907, No. 2

On January 2 of this year, 1907, in the chambers of His Grace Dimitry, Bishop of Turkestan and Tashkent, there was a large gathering of clergy and persons from the community of the city of Verny, who had arrived at the following invitation of the Most Reverend Bishop:

In my diocese, a book entitled “The Philosophy of the Common Cause” has been printed and will soon be published. 1 According to the author of this book, it contains a call to the common cause of our salvation, to the cause of God, accomplished through us, through people, by divine mercy toward us. In terms of the subject of this book, it cannot be ignored by me, and therefore I decided to get acquainted with it and discuss how reliable the path indicated in it is and discuss this with my fellow pastors and with those of my flock who have become known to me for their special zeal for the work of our salvation, as well as with those who stand at the head of various institutions and on whom it depends, therefore, to give one or another direction to the activities of these institutions, to direct them to God or from God, since, according to the author of the book, there is no such activity that would be indifferent to the work of our salvation, which could not and should not be religiousized, could not become sacred.

Considering you among the people whose participation is necessary and desirable in discussing the path leading to our salvation, I ask you to come to me on January 2, 1907, at 6 o'clock in the evening.

After the prayer "O Heavenly King", sung by all those gathered, the Most Reverend Bishop addressed his guests with approximately the following words:

The Apostle Paul, preaching the Gospel, arrived in Athens; there he preached Christ both in the synagogue to the Jews and in the squares to the pagans he met; some argued with him and brought him to the Areopagus, demanding that he explain to them what this new teaching was that he was preaching. Then the Apostle began to preach Christ before the Areopagus, and the Athenians listened to him with attention, and only when the Apostle began to speak about the resurrection, those who listened said to him: we will hear you about this another time. Nevertheless, the Apostle's preaching was effective, and if not all, then some were converted to Christ.

Here in our city a book has been published under the title "Philosophy of the Common Cause", raising and illuminating from a unique point of view many religious questions, and I consider it impossible to ignore this book by our Russian thinker, who thought, as it seems to me, in a truly Christian way. I have invited you to jointly discuss what the book proposes, and I think that we will be worse than the pagan Athenians if we do not pay due attention to this book. January 9, 1907, No. 3

After the Most Reverend, the one who took upon himself the responsibility of introducing the book to which the Most Reverend Bishop drew attention addressed those present. He said: “It is best to begin acquaintance with the book entitled “The Philosophy of the Common Cause” with the article “Disarmament,” which was published more than eight years ago, namely on October 14, 1898, in “New Time.” In publishing this article, Novoye Vremya drew the attention of spiritual, secular and military scholars to it, but the article did not receive such attention, and only almost six months later, in March 1899, in issue 8280 of the same Novoye Vremya, did an article by engineer Simonov appear, “Military Thoughts on Civilian Matters”2, in which he expressed surprise that the article “Disarmament” did not attract attention, and explained this by the fact that the question raised by the article was too unusual and new. I think that the article “Disarmament” did not attract attention because it raises a question that is of only general interest and requires work for the benefit of the common good, selfless work that cannot bring any immediate, personal benefit and all the results of which are only in the future. But in recent times such events have taken place in our fatherland which, it is to be hoped, have led everyone to the conviction that the pursuit of one's own personal, individual, egoistic interests alone leads to common ruin, in which not only our personal well-being perishes, but our very life is exposed to the greatest danger <…>. That is why I hope that both the article "Disarmament, or the Question of How to Turn a Weapon of Destruction into a Weapon of Salvation" and the entire book entitled "The Philosophy of the Common Cause" should attract greater attention at the present time than when our fatherland had not yet been subjected to the trials to which it has been subjected in recent times and which were predicted in the book offered to your attention, although its author died on December 15, 1903, i.e., before our trials began. You can get acquainted with the author of the book from the preface, which was published in No. 1 of the “Turkestan Diocesan Gazette” as a special article under the title given by the Most Reverend Bishop himself, “A True Christian of Our Time.” After this, the articles “Disarmament” and the supplementary one “On the conversion of weapons, i.e. instruments of destruction, into instruments of salvation” were read. At the end of the reading, all those present sang, “It is truly worthy.”

The whole meaning, the whole significance, the whole the essence of the article "Disarmament" and the supplementary article "On the conversion of weapons, i.e. instruments of destruction, into instruments of salvation", read on January 2, consists in an invitation to regulation, i.e. to control the blind forces of nature, or rather, to the expansion of this control, to a new step in this matter, in this work, which alone made man what he is. By nature, man is the most deprived creature, he is deprived of natural integuments, instruments of defense, etc., and he had to create all this for himself, create it with his own labor. The very nutrition of man occurs completely differently from that of animals; herbivores, having reached a pasture, find under their feet everything they need; a predator only needs to catch and tear to pieces another animal that serves as food for him in order to satisfy his hunger; Man must sow the grain necessary for his food, and when this grain ripens, reap it, thresh it, grind it into flour, and bake bread from the flour. And having caught and killed the animal that serves him as food, man must still exert no small amount of labor to prepare food for himself from this animal. And man did not achieve all this suddenly, of course, but gradually, and, one must think, only suffering forced him to expand the scope of his labor; thus, it is very possible that at first he ate only the fruits of the trees, as it was in paradise; but, after his expulsion from paradise, this food, which was given to him by itself, without labor, became insufficient, and hunger forced man to find other food for himself. How he became a hunter living by hunting, a nomad feeding on his herds, and, finally, a farmer, we, of course, do not know for sure; but one must think that hunger forced him from being a trapper to become a cattle breeder, i.e. to take care of the multiplication of the animals necessary for his life; but with the multiplication of people, cattle breeding, requiring vast spaces for grazing cattle, could not save people from hunger, and hunger forced man to become a farmer. Now, when the human race has multiplied so much that there is no longer any land unoccupied by someone, and all the lands that can be cultivated by the methods currently in force are already exhausted, and most importantly, are deprived of irrigation, as a result of the disruption of the meteoric process, due to the cutting down of forests, the draining of swamps, etc., man must take a new step in the field of labor, introduce into the field of human labor that which we ask for in the prayer "for the good dispensation of the air" and which until now has been given to us so, without labor; We are forced to expand our work into this area by the increasingly frequent famines that occur due to droughts that cover larger and larger areas. The article "Disarmament" invites us to such an expansion of work, without waiting for the disasters from hunger, which are always accompanied by all kinds of diseases, to reach their highest degree; this article also points out that explosives, i.e. the very same instrument that until now has served, one might say, only for destruction and has been used by people almost exclusively for mutual extermination, that explosives can serve, as experiments show, to direct the clouds of heaven at the will of man, can serve to control the course of air currents, both dry and those carrying moisture, and force the latter to pour down as rain where this is required by human needs. The vastness of the field of action for the new human labor—the entire ocean of air—its special properties, by virtue of which the action in one place extends in all directions and to the greatest distances, indicate that action in this case is possible only through an organized force, and this organization must be so vast that it can embrace the entire globe—in the article “Disarmament” such an organization is indicated, an army in which, with universal compulsory service, the entire people are drawn, i.e. in the end, all peoples, the entire population of the globe, will enter into this organized force, which at present has as its goal mutual extermination and operates in its designs primarily with explosives. <…> The conversion of the weapons of war and everything used in war into weapons of salvation is not only a great moral but also a religious act, a truly Christian act, and one that constitutes the distinctive feature of Orthodoxy, a feature that not only does not separate Orthodoxy from Catholicism and Protestantism, but leads it to unite with them on the issue of redemption. <…>

How can he who places such hope in the action of the troops treat without bitterness and annoyance those who would like to destroy this great force instead of turning it to the cause of universal salvation <…> How can he not point out the hypocrisy or childishness of these supposed lovers of peace, who exclaim “down with arms!” And is this not childishness, if only they sincerely think that such an exclamation can have meaning in the present state of affairs, when all nations stand against each other fully armed and only await a favorable moment to throw themselves into the shelters of struggle. Those who think like this have obviously not yet matured to the understanding that every phenomenon has its causes and that an army is only a phenomenon generated by deep causes, elemental forces, and it is impossible to destroy an army without destroying the causes that generated it; the destruction of an army will not destroy the hostility of people towards each other, and hostility will find an outlet for itself, and create the necessary instruments for its expression. It is necessary to change the very conditions of existence so that they do not arouse hostility towards each other, as is the case now, but would lead to the consciousness of mutual need for each other, the need of some for others, a common cause is needed, equally necessary for everyone, and only unification in such a cause will cure people of the feeling of hostility, force them to value each other and lead to mutual love. Such a cause is indicated in the book "Philosophy of the Common Cause", the beginning of which can be laid by regulation by the meteoric process; this regulation is discussed in the article "Disarmament". Those who think that a war can be destroyed by cursing an army are like a child who hits a chair on which he has hurt himself. And if these curses against the army and all military men are intended only to arouse malice, hatred of some against others, then what can we call this?!.. As for the impotence of the word, which is pointed out in the article and which is used as a reproach against it, then what power can a word have, how can it act on elemental forces? We are not talking, of course, about the divine word, about the divine action by which, through the prayer of Jesus Navin, the visible course of the sun was stopped, or the movement of the earth was delayed, slowed down; We are not talking about the word with which Our Lord Jesus Christ calmed the storm, multiplied the loaves, healed the sick, raised the dead - about the power with which the prophets, apostles and saints were gifted, we are talking about the ordinary human word, since miracles are performed only in exceptional cases, when the Lord finds it necessary to enlighten people, to show them the path they should follow, without counting on miracles; Our Lord Jesus Christ did not resort to a miracle even when He was hungry ... A word is strong only to the extent that it is convincing, to the extent that it acts on the mind and feelings of people, but it is powerless when it is opposed by elemental force. What meaning can a word have when it is addressed, for example, to a hungry person, or to a person who has become enraged to the point of losing his mind, to self-forgetfulness, or when the entire structure of human life plunges us into war, leads to battle?!.. In any case, the author of the article "Disarmament" cannot be reproached for denying the word its proper meaning; he himself, convincing people to unite in a common cause, to expand the scope of labor, convinces them of this with words.

As for the reproach that the author of the article does not take into account life and bends everything to his theory <…> — what does it mean to take into account life? What did the person who reproached the author of the article I read mean by this expression? How is our life arranged? Is it not arranged under the influence of that blind force of nature which acts both in us (our inclinations, our passions, instincts) and outside of us, and which, directing our life, leads us to death. It is precisely when we conform to life, i.e. submit to the blind forces of nature, that we experience the greatest disasters, and in the end such submission must lead to the destruction of our entire race. The task of the author of the article "Disarmament" is to lead the human race out of submission to the blind forces of nature, so that the human race does not submit to, but controls, regulates these forces; the beginning of such regulation will be laid by the study and regulation of atmospheric, meteoric phenomena. <…>
N. P-n.

We remind you that by 6 o'clock in the evening of January 9, the Most Reverend Bishop invited to himself again all those who received an invitation for January 2. This time, the article entitled "Autocracy" will be read. January 16, 1907, No. 5

On the 9th of this January there was a second reading, before which, as before the first, all those gathered sang "O Heavenly King," and at its end — "It is Truly Meet."

This time the article "Autocracy" was read. <…>
January 19, 1907, No. 6

<…> The second article of the three, placed under the general title "Autocracy," points to the duty of resurrection <…> as the positive content of Orthodoxy, defining what Orthodoxy is and distinguishing it from both Catholicism and Protestantism. Orthodoxy <…> sees salvation not in deeds, like Catholicism, even if these were deeds of charity, because in themselves these deeds do not contain anything salvific in themselves, but are accepted only as payment for salvation; does not recognize Orthodoxy as saving and one faith, in a Protestant way: from the Orthodox point of view <…> salvation can be achieved only by one common deed for all people, the very deed of our salvation, the deed that precisely builds our salvation, consists in the construction of salvation itself; the construction of salvation without faith is impossible, impossible without hope, for, according to the word of the apostle, faith is the realization of what is desired, expected. So, we must participate in the actual work of our salvation, for which we hope and which we expect, we must participate in the construction of our salvation, but salvation from what? For us men and for our salvation, Our Lord Jesus Christ came down from heaven—but for salvation from what? There cannot be two answers to this question, apparently, for it is obvious to everyone that Our Lord Jesus Christ came down to save us from death and everything that leads to death—from illness, hunger, and all kinds of deprivation and shortcomings. But has the Lord accomplished the work of our salvation, if death and everything that leads to death reign among men just as they did before the coming of Our Savior? Yes, the work of our salvation has been divinely accomplished, but it has not yet been accomplished humanly; on the part of God, everything has been done to deliver people from death, but on the part of us, people, very little has been done to perceive this work of our salvation, and the whole meaning of life, the history of the human race after Christ's resurrection, is that the Lord is long-suffering, expecting that we ourselves will take part in the divine work of our salvation, that we ourselves will become God's instruments in this work, in the construction of our salvation, that is, in the work of resurrecting the dead; in this work, those who live to see the blessed day of resurrection will also find their immortality - "we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed," says the apostle. And we are talking about salvation from real death, about such death as everyone knows it, not only about spiritual death, but about both physical death and resurrection in bodies, for Christ was resurrected not spiritually, but also physically. <…> If we understand Christianity <…> as the duty of resurrection, the fulfillment of which lies with people themselves, as the work of God, accomplished through people and bequeathed to us by our Savior, Who, in order to attract all people to the fulfillment of this duty, gave Himself up to terrible torments, then in order to fulfill this duty people must come to such a unity, the image of which is given to us in the Holy Trinity, that is, to be united with the complete independence of personalities, without their merging, without the absorption of some personalities by others, and the independence of personalities should not lead them to discord. But people will come to such unity only by implementing, arranging one, common to all, work of our salvation from death and everything that leads to death - from illness, hunger, all kinds of deprivation and shortcomings, from all kinds of suffering, directing all our knowledge, science, all our art, our whole life to the arrangement of our salvation. With such a unification of the entire human race, i.e. all rational beings, reason will be the force that will govern all other forces of nature[1], now dark and destructive in their darkness; with such a unification, reason, i.e. the bearer of reason, the human race, will also govern those forces on which the very movement of our earth and all heavenly bodies depends - from the smallest molecules to the largest planets and suns, will also govern the forces of vegetation on which life depends, and, thus, will receive the opportunity to resurrect everything dead and preserve the life of everything living and revived, will possess the whole world, will be the soul of the world, now soulless, i.e. insensitive and meaningless; this will also be the fulfillment of the commandment of our God, given to man at the very creation of him and the world.

God created force (the world, nature) and a being capable of governing it (man), to whom he gave the first to govern ("subdue it and have dominion" - Genesis 1, 28). But this being, endowed with reason and therefore capable of controlling force, limited itself to contemplation and pleasure; and then force, left to itself, without control, became blind and, thus, through the inaction of reason, began to create evil, creating, began to destroy what was created ... Moreover, the very being endowed with reason - having recognized itself only as contemplating and identifying contemplation with rationality - having multiplied, did not remain united, and in the person of those who were most alienated from the majority, who became prodigal sons, in the person of intellectuals and philosophers (the worst of people who imagined themselves the best), convinced itself that each needs to know only himself! "Know thyself" - was the commandment of disunity and the denial of unification. Disunity and struggle made people weak, limiting each other. Proceeding from this same impious commandment, which commands us to know only ourselves, to care only for our own self-improvement, and not recognizing the consequences of disunity and struggle, philosophers, having lost the meaning and purpose of life, uttered a great blasphemy, having said that God created man, his own image and likeness, limited and finite. To the honor of the human race, it must be said that if there were among us those who denied the existence of God, then only in such a slandered form ... There were, however, conscientious philosophers who decided to justify God in his own guilt, there were philosophers who recognized that God created limited rational power and unlimited blind power; and subordinated the first, the feeling one, to the latter, the insensitive one; so that rational power, i.e., rational beings, became mortal, and irrational power — immortal, the unreasonable and insensitive force began to “shine with eternal beauty,” while rational and sentient beings were given over to the ugliness of decay. But such a justification was worse than any accusation.

“Repent” — the commandment of gathering (more fully expressed in the commandment — “go, teach, baptize,” i.e. cleansing by repentance) was directed against the egoistic commandment of disunity… To repent means to admit that God did not create us limited and mortal, i.e. mortifying ourselves and others (“God did not create death,” — it is said in Scripture), that our task is unification, unification for the return of life to the mortified. Such is the great result of self-accusation in place of God-accusation; self-accusation, or repentance, turns the whole human race into an instrument of God for the restoration of life to the dead or slain.

So, if Orthodoxy is a duty, i.e. a matter of universal resurrection, for the implementation of which it is necessary to control all the forces of nature, the entire boundless universe, if the whole human race, all branches of knowledge are required to serve this matter, if Orthodoxy does not place any limits on the knowledge or the work of rational beings - as instruments of an omniscient and omnipotent Being - then what can be outside Orthodoxy and what broader definition can be given to Orthodoxy?!.. And it is clear that Orthodoxy, which demands the unification of all without exception in a boundless matter, cannot but consider all current systems of morality insufficient, but, however, does not deny them. The highest morality is expressed not in the Sermon on the Mount, as many think, but in the commandment of gathering: "Go and make disciples of all nations" in the name of the Triune God, Who is the model of the most perfect society and in Whom unity is not a yoke, not oppression, not constraint, and the independence of individuals does not lead to discord. All the evil from which we suffer lies in the separation of reason from faith, if we understand faith as a deed, as the realization of what is desired ("I look forward to the resurrection of the dead," Epistle to the Hebrews. XI: 1). Every church is a school of catechumenate, i.e., teaching, and a temple of baptism, understanding by baptism, in accordance with the catechism, all the sacraments. Baptism is cleansing or redemption from sin as the cause of death, i.e., it is the return of life sinless and therefore immortal. And science is the study of death and life, for it reveals that the entire Universe consists of those atoms and molecules into which every dying creature disintegrates and from which every living thing is composed. Art consists in the ability to reassemble and revive everything that has been disintegrated, and not to create only a semblance of the living. Then, that is, when we possess this ability, then disintegration will no longer have power over people.

It is necessary, however, to note that everything written here, as well as everything set forth in the book "Philosophy of the Common Cause" are only questions, as is evident from the fact that this entire book is called by the author a note from the unlearned to the learned, and its first articles are entitled thus: "The Question of Brotherhood, or Kinship, on the Causes of the Non-Brotherly, Non-Relative, i.e. Non-fatty, State of Fat, and on the Means of Restoring Kinship." With this question we, the unlearned, turn first of all to our learned hierarchs, to the archpastors and pastors, the builders of the mysteries of our salvation, we turn with the question: will the structure of our salvation always remain a mystery to us, will we forever be excluded from participation in this structure, must we forever remain in ignorance of how it, our salvation, is being built, i.e. must we forever remain in the position of senseless infants, incapable of being perfect, as our Heavenly Father is perfect? But if this is so, then how can such an understanding be reconciled with the mercy of God and with the teaching of our Savior, Who, according to the word of the Apostle, “desires to come to the knowledge of the truth,” Who “gave some apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, some pastors and teachers,” so that we all might come “to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, that we should no longer be children” (Eph. IV: 11-14)?

The author of the book “The Philosophy of the Common Cause” does not recognize for himself the right or freedom to have his own conviction without the obligation to investigate the causes of differences of opinion, without taking upon himself the duty of knowledge; he finds that our own conviction, which is at odds with the convictions of others, our close ones, in whose midst we live, arousing in us a complacency in the justice of their convictions, does not yet give us the right to disagreement, but imposes on us the duty of investigating the causes of disagreement, imposes on us the duty of knowledge in order to eliminate disagreement, in which case there can be no love. And such doubt, leading to investigation, to knowledge, will be only a legitimate incentive to attain truth, i.e., the mind of truth; such doubt is similar to the doubt of St. Apostle Thomas, who did not rejoice when he doubted the resurrection of Christ: the apostle's doubt arose from the greatest sorrow and from an irresistible desire to see the Risen One, for the accomplishment of which Apostle Thomas would not stop at any difficulties. Doubt in the justice of the convictions of our close ones, doubt that does not turn into a triumphant conviction, since it diverges from the convictions of the the expectations of all others, but arousing great sorrow and irresistibly urging everyone to new and new research in order to achieve the mind of truth, which will unite everyone in unanimity, in a single feeling, in mutual love - such doubt is not only legitimate, but also holy doubt. And the author of the book "Philosophy of the Common Cause", expounding the doctrine of the resurrection, does not pass this doctrine off as something indisputable; everything he expounds are only questions addressed first of all to scholars, spiritual and secular, civil and military, as leaders in knowledge, and then to all living. All this is only an invitation to research, to study, to knowledge for the resolution of questions that everyone asks himself and without the resolution of which life becomes vague, difficult, because it seems aimless and meaningless. But even when asking questions, it is necessary to substantiate them, for a well-posed, i.e. well-substantiated question is already, as they rightly say, half the answer. The entire content of the book "The Philosophy of the Common Cause" is an attempt to substantiate those questions which, we repeat, everyone asks; no one can remain alien to them; the complete disregard of these questions by our church, civil and military administration has led to the alienation of the entire, one might say, intelligentsia from the church, has led to the fact that religion has ceased to be taken seriously, and has led to the general disorder in which our fatherland now finds itself.
January 23, 1907, No. 7

Dear Sir
Mr. Editor!

On behalf of His Grace, the Most Reverend Dimitry, I have the honor to ask you to publish this letter on the first page of the Semirechensk Regional Gazette, in order to avoid possible misunderstandings regarding the article published in issue 6 of the Semirechensk Regional Gazette, entitled “Readings in the Chambers of the Most Reverend Dimitry, Bishop of Turkestan and Tashkent.”

The published article is not a summary of the readings that were offered in the chambers of His Grace, but only the personal opinion of Mr. N. P-n regarding what was read, an opinion that from beginning to end has nothing in common with the Orthodox teaching on the resurrection of the dead.

Apparently, the article published in issue No. 6 of the Semirechensk Oblast News arose after the reading in the chambers of His Grace of two articles from the book by N. F. Fedorov, The Philosophy of the Common Cause, on Disarmament and Autocracy, where the author, among other things, dwells on the “duty of resurrecting ancestors.” Since the expression “duty of resurrecting ancestors” is not clarified in the aforementioned articles, an exchange of opinions arose between those present, and the Orthodox teaching on the resurrection of the dead was expressed, with which the teaching on the “resurrection of ancestors” is not in agreement, as far as can be concluded from what was read.

Today at 6 o'clock in the evening in the chambers of the Most Reverend, in the presence of persons previously invited by His Grace, a continuation of the reading of the interesting book "Philosophy of the Common Cause" will take place; detailed reviews of both the readings and the book itself will appear on the pages of the regional gazette under the signature of Mr. P-n.
January 26, 1907, No. 8

A letter to the editor, sent on behalf of His Grace and placed in the last issue of the regional gazette (7), was inadvertently printed without a signature. We hasten to correct this unfortunate omission of the proofreader. This letter was signed as follows: "Secretary of His Grace, priest S. Apollov." COMMENTS

This is a slightly abridged version of the materials published in the Semirechensk Regional News newspaper, dedicated to the reading and discussion of Fedorov's articles, which took place in Verny (now Almaty) on January 2 and 9, 1907, on the initiative of His Grace Dimitry, Bishop of Turkestan and Tashkent and Fedorov's student N.P. Peterson. The reason for the Readings was the upcoming publication of Volume I of the Philosophy of the Common Cause in Verny, where Peterson had served since the spring of 1904.

A few words about His Grace Dimitry, on whose initiative the Readings began. Bishop Dimitry (in the world - David Abashidze), a descendant of an ancient family of Georgian princes, graduated from the Tiflis Classical Gymnasium, the Law Faculty of the Novorossiysk University, after which in 1892 he entered the Kiev Theological Academy. He was tonsured a monk at the Kiev-Pechersk Lavra on November 16, 1892, on November 21 he was elevated to the rank of hierodeacon, and on June 9, 1896 - to the rank of hieromonk. After leaving the Academy with a candidate of theology degree, he served in the Tiflis and Kutaisi Theological Seminaries, and in 1900 he was appointed rector of the Alexander Missionary Theological Seminary and elevated to the rank of archimandrite. In 1902, he became Bishop of Alaverdi, the second vicar of the Georgian diocese and rector of the Transfiguration Monastery in Tiflis. He headed the Georgian diocesan school council and the Committee for the management of the Archaeological Museums of the Georgian diocese. From 1903, he was Bishop of Guria-Mingrelian, and from 1905, Bishop of Balta.

His Grace Dimitry was appointed Bishop of Turkestan and Tashkent on January 20, 1906. He arrived in Verny on March 23, 1906 and immediately began actively organizing diocese, striving to raise the spiritual and moral level of the clergy and laity. With his active participation, the "Turkestan Diocesan News" began to be published on August 15, 1906, the initiative for the publication of which had already been repeatedly put forward by the Vernoye public and clergy, who, however, did not find support in the previous bishop. N. P. Peterson met His Grace Dimitry soon after his installation in the Vernoye cathedra. On October 25, 1906, he informed V. A. Kozhevnikov that he had visited the Bishop about five times and had talked with him (NIOR RSL. Fund 657. Book 10. Unit 25. Sheet 61 ob.). It was during these meetings that he told the bishop about the first volume of the Philosophy of the Common Cause that was being published in his diocese, described the personality and life of his teacher, and perhaps read some passages from his works. He also introduced Bishop Dimitry to his preface to the volume that was being published, in which, with references to the testimonies of his contemporaries, the ascetic life of Fedorov was presented, "an extraordinary man," "extremely remarkable," who selflessly served people. Here he also spoke briefly about the significance of his writings, in which, according to Peterson, "the question of the meaning and purpose of existence is resolved, the value of life is determined," "the question of fatherland and brotherhood is raised," "a call is made for a common cause for all people." “The works offered to our general attention,” he emphasized, “contain, in our deep conviction, that new word which Russia is called to say to the world, that indication of the work which Russia is called to bring to the world, that justification of Moscow, which recognized itself as the Third Rome at the dawn of its existence, <…> reveal the meaning of that self-awareness, or rather, the still undefined feeling of the Russian people, which calls Russia holy, the self-awareness inherent in a great people” (Philosophy of the Common Cause. I, V, VI).

Apparently, it was precisely these emphases in the presentation of Fedorov as a person and thinker that played the main role in the emergence of interest in his personality and ideas on the part of the Vernoye bishop. Dmitry, despite his Georgian origin, was a sincere patriot of Russia, deeply believed in its historical destiny—as a Christian power, a spiritual enlightener of humanity, and the words about “the work that will make Russia, now alien and even hateful to everyone, in the words of Nikolai Fyodorovich, ‘native, dear and dear’” (Ibid. P. V), could not help but touch his soul, just as what Peterson wrote about the life of the righteous philosopher could not leave him indifferent. Be that as it may, but already in the first issue of the "Turkestan Diocesan News", "at the request" of the Bishop, Peterson gave the text of the preface he had written, where it was published as a separate article, and the title of the article - "A True Christian of Our Time" - "was given by His Grace himself" (N.P. Peterson - V.A. Kozhevnikov. November 26-29, 1906 // NIOR RSL. Fund 657. Coll. 10. Unit of storage 15. Leaflets 67-67 rev.). And at the end of December, representatives of the clergy and laity of the city of Verny were sent an invitation to the Readings on behalf of the Bishop, in the compilation of which, judging by the style and content, Peterson also took direct part.

The first and second Readings took place on January 2 and 9. The choice of articles proposed for discussion in the Bishop's chambers is characteristic. The first of them was the article "Disarmament", which put forward a project to turn the army from fighting its own kind to fighting natural disasters (rainfall, earthquakes, floods, fires, etc.), in which Fedorov saw the first, preliminary step of humanity towards the matter of regulating nature; it spoke of the moral duty of scientists called to a comprehensive study of the causes of natural cataclysms that threaten human life. Even in the preface to Volume I, Peterson said that Fedorov, "following Christ, whose mission was to unite everyone, to unite Jews and pagans in the common cause of resurrection, strives to unite even believers with unbelievers in the same cause." And he pointed specifically to the article "Disarmament" and the adjacent article "On the conversion of weapons, i.e. instruments of destruction, into instruments of salvation", which, in his hope, could convert non-believers to Christianity, and active Christianity: "An unbeliever who begins reading with these articles, if only he has not yet lost the ability to think, if he has still retained the ability to understand the great, will read the entire book" (Philosophy of the Common Cause. I, VII). The second article - "Autocracy" - by its content should have evoked particular sympathy from the Bishop, a convinced monarchist, who more than once emphasized in his sermons the importance of the tsar's power in the matter of building the Russian state, speaking of the tsar as the guardian of the unity of the nation, responsible before God for the fate of his people. Peterson considered this article especially relevant in view of the historical moment experienced by Russia in 1905-1907. (The First Russian Revolution, the manifesto "On the improvement of the state order", the convocation of the First State Assembly minds—events that were steadily moving the country toward the collapse of the monarchy).

As early as January 5, the Semirechensk Regional Gazette began publishing reports on the meetings in the bishop's chambers in the Local News section. They were compiled by N.P. Peterson and placed under the signature of "N. P-n", each time taking up two newspaper issues. The reports consisted of two parts: an information note reporting on the progress of the Readings, and the article itself, in which Fedorov's student explained the meaning of the text read, simultaneously answering some of the objections and questions that arose among those present during the Readings.

That the discussions of the articles read were not smooth and that a controversy flared up around them, in which opinions were expressed about the inconsistency of the “teaching about the ‘resurrection of ancestors’” with the “Orthodox teaching about the resurrection of the dead,” we learn from a letter published in the same “Semirechensk Regional News” on January 23, 1907. This letter is a very symptomatic and thought-provoking document. Clearly, some kind of struggle unfolded around the teaching of the “common cause,” and a number of participants in the discussion spoke out against the active Christian understanding of the resurrection, but the most important and interesting question is: what position did the Bishop himself take in this dispute? Was he equally categorically in disagreement with the ideas of the one whom he himself had recently called “a true Christian of our time”?

A noteworthy fact: the letter did not indicate that it was written on behalf of Bishop Dimitry. Here it was said only that its sender asked to publish this letter “on the front page” of the newspaper “on the instructions of the bishop.” The authorship of the accusations of Fedorov’s unorthodoxy was not revealed either: “…the Orthodox teaching on the resurrection of the dead was expressed, with which the teaching on the ‘resurrection of ancestors’ does not correspond, as far as can be concluded from what has been read.” If this accusation had belonged to the bishop himself, it is unlikely that the wording would have been so evasive, and even softened by the final “as far as can be concluded from what has been read.”

The second noteworthy fact: immediately after the publication of this letter on the pages of the newspaper there followed an editorial announcement about the continuation of the Readings, and no later than the evening of the same day. Again, it is difficult to imagine that the bishop, once he had come to the unshakable conclusion about Fedorov’s unorthodoxy, would have wished to continue reading excerpts from the “dubious” book in his own chambers.

So, what was behind this letter, initially published in the newspaper without a signature? Judging by the editorial correction that appeared in the next issue of the Semirechensk Regional News, the signature under the letter should have been: “Secretary of His Grace, Priest S. Apollov.” In all likelihood, it was Fr. Sergius (Apollov), who had been appointed shortly before this as the dean of the Cathedral of the city of Verny and the trustee of all visiting clergy, who was Peterson’s main opponent at the dispute in the Bishop’s chambers, as well as the initiator and author of the public newspaper statement. He also exerted the main pressure on the Bishop, forcing him first to agree to the publication of a refutation letter, and then to stop the Readings. Perhaps, at the insistence of Fr. Sergius was joined by other people from the Bishop's entourage, so that the "pressure" ultimately had its effect: the announcement of a new meeting, placed after S. Apollov's letter, turned out to be the last one, and Peterson's reviews also disappeared from the pages of the Vernoye newspaper.

The fact that the discussion of Fedorov's works was interrupted by the Bishop not without internal resistance and that he himself, unlike his entourage, did not say an unequivocal "no" to the teaching of the common cause, is indirectly confirmed by other circumstances. After the end of the Readings, N.P. Peterson continued to meet with the Bishop and talk with him, and in April 1907, after the publication of Volume I of the "Philosophy of the Common Cause," he gave Bishop Dimitry two copies of the book, "one for him and the other for Archbishop Antony of Volyn" Khrapovitsky, whom the Bishop greatly revered. Moreover, on his own instructions, Bishop Dimitry, Nikolai Pavlovich sent a copy of Volume I to Archimandrite Feofan, inspector of the St. Petersburg Theological Academy (NIOR RSL. F. 657. K. 10. Ed. h. 28. L. 9 ob., 10). We learn about all this from the letter of N.P. Peterson to V.A. Kozhevnikov dated May 7, 1907, in which Nikolai Pavlovich, among other things, reports that it was Bishop Dimitry who pointed him to the brochure of Moscow Theological Academy professor A.D. Belyaev, “Autocracy,” which spoke of Fedorov and included extensive excerpts from Kozhevnikov’s book (Ibid. L. 10). It hardly needs proof that if the attitude of the Bishop to Fedorov’s ideas had been similar to the attitude of his own secretary, such a development of events would not have taken place.

In 1907-1910. In the church bulletins of the diocese, personally supervised by the bishop, articles by Peterson regularly appear, in which he interprets contemporary social and spiritual problems from the standpoint of Fedorov’s teaching (bibliography of Peterson’s articles in the “Turkestan Diocesan "For the Turkestan Diocesan Gazette" see: Bibliography. 1995. No. 2. P. 123). And practically none of the articles mentioned can do without a direct mention of the philosopher's name and a statement, sometimes brief and sometimes detailed, of his religious ideas - the conversion of dogma into a commandment, history as the "work of salvation" and, of course, immanent resurrection. Moreover, on the pages of the "Turkestan Diocesan Gazette" in a certain sense the controversy around Fedorov's teaching, which began in January 1907 in the Bishop's chambers, also receives its continuation. In issues 8 and 10 of the Gazette for the same year, an article signed "M." was published. "The Ultimate Ideal of the Intelligentsia from the Point of View of Its Implementation", the author of which, criticizing the reports of V.A. Ternavtsev and D.S. Merezhkovsky at the St. Petersburg religious and philosophical meetings of 1901-1903, rejected the hope expressed in them for an optimistic, good outcome of history, which, in his opinion, contradicted the Christian teaching, according to which "evil, sin, death will exist in the world until the end", and therefore, the dream of a "kingdom of universal brotherhood, happiness, love" is unrealizable" (Turkestan Diocesan Gazette. 1907. No. 8. April 15. P. 161) here on earth - in an earthly, sorrowful and suffering life, only the internal spiritual improvement of each individual is possible, but not the world as a whole. N.P. Peterson responded to this article with the article "Is the Kingdom of God Realizable on Earth?" (Ibid., No. 11, 12), in which he refuted the assertion that the idea of ​​the Kingdom of God on earth has no "Christian-dogmatic basis." "To reject the hope of establishing the Kingdom of God on earth," he emphasized, "means to reduce all of Christianity to nothing," to render history meaningless (Ibid., No. 10. May 15. P. 232). In solidarity with "M." in his criticism of secular progress, whose adherents hope to build a future paradise on the bones of previously living generations and utopianly believe that mortal man can be happy, he at the same time pointed out that the Kingdom of God on earth is not at all identical to the progressive earthly paradise, that it presupposes a complete transformation of the world and man. Moreover, the destruction of death: “the resurrection of all the dead and immortality are the necessary conditions of the Kingdom of God, to establish which on earth means to turn everything earthly into heavenly. Our task, commanded by Christ our Savior, is to create the Kingdom of God first on earth, and then to spread it to all the heavenly worlds, which are the same lands as our earth” (Ibid. No. 12. June 15. P. 321). A Christian, Peterson emphasized, cannot limit himself to working on the soul, for salvation of the whole and universal is not enough. Developing Fedorov's thesis about the direct connection between the spiritual and moral imperfection of man and the flaws of his physical mortal nature, he wrote: "The internal, spiritual alone, not supported by the external, material, is fragile and quickly, like a mirage, disappears. The sermon of our Lord that the Kingdom of God is within us does not exclude the necessity of the Kingdom of God outside of us <…>. And the Kingdom of God will be within us only when it is also outside of us, both are mutually dependent, - and only when the internal is supported by the external, and the external, material, is inspired by the internal, spiritual, only then will the state be impossible, which the Apostle Paul testifies to, saying that the good he wants, he does not do, and the evil he does not want, he does." In the economy of salvation, personal acquisition of grace must be combined with the work of transforming “our very body,” deification, and the surrounding world, so that everything external becomes “a worthy vessel of the Kingdom of God” (Ibid. pp. 321-322, 325).

The first part of Peterson’s article was followed by a polemical response from P.I. Kvesit, a candidate of theology, secretary of the Turkestan Spiritual Consistory and editor of the official section of the diocesan gazette. Apparently, he was another opponent of those who spoke out against Fedorov’s ideas at the Readings in the Bishop’s chambers (cf. the notable phrase from P.Ya. Tsirkunov’s letter to N.P. Peterson dated June 28, 1907: “Your idea of ​​conquering the forces of nature to enable a comfortable diet also has a social meaning and, if it were feasible on the basis of fraternal unity, it would serve humanity as a great blessing. I don’t even understand how the consistory priests found it unOrthodox” — Research Institute of Orthodox Studies of the Russian State Library. Fund 657. Collection 6. Unit 73. Sheet 8). "Learn, and then teach!" was the title of his article, written in a haughty, almost contemptuous tone. P.I. Kvesit rejected the hope expressed in Peterson's article for the universality of salvation (provided that humanity turns to God's ways), accused his student Fedorov of "complete misunderstanding and inattentive reading of the Holy Scriptures," of "false wisdom," and wished him "to test his shaky conclusions with the works of domestic theologians" or "at least a short catechism" (Turkestan Diocesan Gazette. No. 11. June 1. Pp. 270, 272). Peterson was quick to respond to this rebuke. 

Having pointed out the inadmissibility of intolerance and arrogance on the part of certified theologians in answering questions that confuse not only him personally, but also many other people seeking faith, but not a childishly blind faith, but an adult, conscious faith, having emphasized that leaving these questions unanswered “has already led to the fact that our entire intelligentsia has become unbelievers,” he noted: “I can assure Mr. Quesit that I try to read the Holy Scriptures most carefully and I try to check my conclusions, which I come to while reading, with everything accessible to me, not neglecting the short catechism; but, unfortunately for me, even with the help of Mr. Quesit I cannot take his point of view and cannot be convinced that destruction is inevitable and that it is predetermined by the Lord. And since the vast majority of ordinary people who have not risen to the heights of scholarship in which Mr. Kvesit hovers are all thirsty for salvation and have the right to participate in the work of salvation, which cannot be anyone’s specialty, will Mr. Kvesit not condescend to us and explain to us in simple language, understandable to all, whether salvation is possible, whether a state of bliss is possible, if many of our loved ones are given over to eternal torment?” (N. P-n [Peterson N. P.]. Learn, then teach // Ibid. No. 12. June 15. P. 316). This favorite question of Fedorov, presented entirely in his spirit - in the form of an appeal from the unlearned to the learned, remained unanswered - in the short note by P. Kvesit placed there, there was nothing except, alas, a pharisaical remark: "We welcome, albeit a weak turn of the venerable Mr. N. P-n in the good direction, may God help him further in this direction," assurances that the church does not at all want to alienate representatives of the intelligentsia, and nitpicking at the logic of his opponent (Kvesit P. Answer to Mr. N. P-n // Ibid. Pp. 316-318).

In the same spirit of petty nitpicking, the editorial notes to the second part of Peterson's article "Is the Kingdom of God Realizable on Earth?" were also written. But what is characteristic is that the article, in the opinion of the editors, “clearly disagrees with the teaching about the Kingdom of God, which is preserved by the Orthodox Church” (Ibid. No. 11. June 1. P. 268, editor’s note) — was nevertheless published in the diocesan gazette, and published without any censorship. And the “false wisdom” of the publicist was not only not denied access to the pages of this church organ, but, on the contrary, his articles, sometimes quite voluminous, appear there several times a year. The only thing that the editor of the unofficial section of the gazette (it was in this section that Peterson’s articles were published), priest, decided to do, and then only once. Mikhail (Kolobov), - this should be written in an editorial note to one of the articles: “The editors consider it necessary to stipulate that they do not agree in everything with the views of the venerable author, namely with the idea of ​​​​a real resurrection, <…> presented in detail in the “Philosophy of the Common Cause” by the late N.F. Fedorov,” but do not shorten those parts of the article where this is discussed, not wanting “to violate the completeness of the presentation and out of respect for the fact that Mr. N. P-n <…> ardently defends the ideas dear to the heart of every believing Orthodox person” about the Russian Church as “the only true Church of Christ, the keeper of the apostolic teaching” and about autocracy as “the only form of government that is saving for Russia, the basis of Russian state life, its stronghold and affirmation” (Ibid. 1908. No. 9. May 1. P. 313). But the paradox is that Peterson defended these statements, so close to the editors (and, let us recall, to His Grace Dimitry himself), relying precisely on Fedorov, on his projective, actively Christian understanding of both Orthodoxy and autocracy, called upon to unite and lead humanity in a common resurrection work...

By the way, the editors' polemical notes to Peterson's articles, which took place in 1907-1908, completely disappear in the following two years, which account for the largest number of his articles in the Turkestan Diocesan Gazette with numerous references to Fedorov (in 1910, when Father V. Antonov became the editor of the unofficial section of the newspaper, Peterson's articles, which contained a direct apology for Fedorov's ideas, were even published on the title page of the Gazette). Moreover, when the article “New School” appeared in issue No. 5 for 1909, which was a “Denunciation” to “His Eminence Dimitry, Bishop of Turkestan and Tashkent” from N.P. Peterson, “the organizer of the parish school of literacy at the Church of the Entry of the Most Holy Theotokos into the Temple under construction, which is in the clover fields of the city of Verny,” the editors prefaced it not only with non-polemic words, but on the contrary, with sympathetic and kind words: “N.P. Peterson, the closest disciple of our late philosopher N.F. Fedorov, set himself the lofty goal of creating a new Christian school according to the thoughts of his great teacher. We sincerely wish the highly respected Nikolai Pavlovich success in his holy work <…>”, after which came the text of Peterson himself, from which it followed that the school itself, conceived as a school “not only of literacy”, but “of prayer and work”, was created with the blessing and without direct care of His Grace Dimitry. The Bishop himself appointed a religious teacher for the new school, Hieromonk Vitaly, who—as Peterson testifies in his letters to Kozhevnikov (NIOR RSL. F. 657. K. 61-62 rev.; see also Fr. Vitaly’s letter to Peterson—Ibid. L. 63-66)—was deeply imbued with Fedorov’s ideas. As we can see, Fedorov’s ideas in the field of public education, his project of a school-church that inextricably linked teaching with Christian upbringing, and knowledge with research, were close to the Bishop.

Finally, we will cite one more piece of evidence of His Grace’s attention. Dmitry to the thoughts of the philosopher of the universal cause, dating back to 1912. Discussing in correspondence with V.A. Kozhevnikov the possibility of addressing Fedorov's ideas to the Council of the Russian Orthodox Church, if it were to be convened, Peterson reported the following: "I consider it necessary to address the Council if the Council will be something serious, but if it will be like our Duma, then of course there is no point in addressing it. <…> Yesterday evening I read the article about the Exhibition of 1889 to His Grace Dmitry and made a great impression on him. On May 16, he invited me to go with him to his dacha 10 miles from Verny, and I promised to read him the article "Project for the unification of churches" and from the article "The Council" about the parliament of religions. "The Most Reverend Dimitry sat in the Synod last summer and will, of course, be a member of the Council" (N.P. Peterson - V.A. Kozhevnikov. May 12, 1912 // NIOR RSL. F. 657. K. 10. Unit of storage 28. L. 48, 49 rev.).

1 On the cover of Volume I of "The Philosophy of the Common Cause" was the year 1906, but in reality the book was published in early 1907.

2 The article by military engineer V.Ya. Simonov "Military Thoughts on Civilian Affairs", the author of which supported the idea of ​​"using the army for peaceful purposes", was published in the newspaper "New Time" on March 17 (19), 1899. For more information about this article, as well as about N.F. Fedorov's article "Disarmament", see: Fedorov. T. P. S. 477-478.