Is it not strange that Nietzsche, who obviously did not understand that essential Slavic trait which was manifested both in the unanimous decision to create an ordinary temple and in its unanimous execution, nevertheless considered himself a Slav by origin, and that he came from the noble family of the Nietzkys? In saying this, he, in his own words, "counts himself among the superior race." What is characteristic here, however, is that he counts himself among that very branch of it which, having renounced the common Slavic traditions, betrayed its native, distorted it, and became in its historical life the embodiment not of ancestral unity, but of internal discord. And so we see that the extreme individualist Nietzsche admires precisely this trait of the Polish race, and is proud of the right of every nobleman to destroy with his "liberum veto," with his single disagreement, the decision of the entire Sejm. This nobleman of philosophy, more arrogant and power-hungry than all its previous kings and lords, opposes his "veto!" to everything that they decided for the entire human race. In many ways, one cannot help but be grateful to him for this: the arbitrariness and violence of philosophy demanded retribution, and Nietzsche, an admirer of cruelty, showed it in full force in relation to the conceit and despotism of philosophy. But, powerful in destruction, was he strong enough in the creation of truth?

Nietzsche's great merit is that he calls for a transition beyond the boundaries of good and evil. His mistake is that instead of the tree of life, he planted the tree of death beyond these boundaries. He felt the need for something higher for man, and he thought to embody this need in his "superman," which turned out, however, to be only an unjustified self-exaltation of man above his own kind, and, moreover, much more similar to him than it seems to him: like Faust, noticing his small dissimilarities with all mortals, Nietzsche takes this insignificant dissimilarity for a great superiority. And yet the highest in man should be higher not than beings like him, but higher than the blind, unreasonable, deadly force of nature. Nietzsche, in love with freedom, intoxicated by the mania of power, treats this force with truly slavish apathy, with purely slavish impotence. Wasting his strength on the childishly vain exaltation of himself (the superman) above those whom he himself calls pygmies, he overlooks and ignores the common enemy-titan—the deadly force of nature. Calling for a struggle with his own kind, he does not call for a struggle with the source of universal misfortunes, universal evil; he impotently and faintheartedly reconciles himself to death, to losses; and if he does speak of returns to life, then in a completely false sense, that is, again, in a passive sense.

But if "the world is a will striving for power" (as Nietzsche understands it), then in a world in which rational power will reign, in which everything will be known and governed, only one, and a conscious, active return, is possible. Then our present assumption about the innumerable returns that have been and will continue to be will not become merely an abstract and unproven thought, but an action that we are conscious of and feel. Infinite returns, which occur of themselves without the ruling human will, would again become possible only when this conscious power is again lost; only then will blind force (the "blind will" according to Nietzsche) again generate in order to kill again.

The idea of ​​return did not appear in Nietzsche through the natural course of development of philosophical thought; it was some kind of accidental intrusion into his teaching, even a complete contradiction of his entire philosophy. In order for the idea of ​​return to be a natural conclusion from his teaching, as a continuation of the teaching of Schopenhauer, we must give the following definition to this predecessor and inspirer of Nietzsche: "The world as a will to being, and to reality - as a bondage to death (i.e. before death), and therefore the world as a representation of what is bondage before death, must be a project of return to being." Nietzsche recognized in the will the desire for power, and therefore in the definition of Schopenhauer given now <<*1>> the following correction must be made: in the world, i.e. in the universe, as a bondage to death, the will, becoming power, must manifest itself in a return to life, to being. The world as a representation of bondage to death, but without the power [to overcome it], will be only an assumption of an involuntary return, subject to death, a repeated, countless return. A representation, combined with power, the unity of thought with deed will be a project of a voluntary and conscious return, immanent, and not transcendent, a return of life that is never-ending, immortal. In place of the antinomy in which Nietzsche revolves, in place of the transitions from “l’Iternel devenir” to “l’Iternel revenir” (in the words of Fouillier) there must be a single, uninterrupted, eternal life. Notes to the article "The nobleman-philosopher"

1) Nietzsche is the son and grandson of pastors and a mother from a pastoral family, who was known as the "little pastor" at the Naumburg elementary school, and at the Pforta school, after completing the 6-year course, he received excellent marks in the law of God and insufficient marks in mathematics in his school-leaving certificate and Hebrew, became an atheist and immoralist, while his ancestors, by his own admission, the Polish nobles of Nitsky did not hesitate to leave their homeland for the sake of preserving religion.

Proud of his Polish origin, lamenting the fall of Sevastopol for 11 years and expressing his sorrow about this in verse, he received excellent marks in German at the Pforta school, but, it seems, knew neither Russian nor Polish.

The author of the doctrine of the "excess of history" (who, therefore, claimed the rank of judge of the historical destiny of mankind) in Pforta himself, however, received in history and geography, as well as in the natural sciences, not excellent, not good, but only satisfactory marks!..

2) If Russian writers, such as Pushkin, Gogol, and even especially Gogol and L. N. Tolstoy, can (in some respects) be recognized as foreigners writing about Russia, then Nietzsche, at least sometimes, can be recognized as a Russian writing about Germany and the West in general.

In the person of Nietzsche, the West renounced itself, but did not replace the German or the Western with anything positive. When Tolstoy declares himself Christ, or at least his teaching as the true Christ's, then we, warned about the appearance of many false Christs, have no faith in him. When Nietzsche declares himself the Antichrist or expects the coming of the Antichrist, then even in this Antichrist not everything turns out to be anti-Christian.

*1 It would be more accurate to say: “in the definition of the Schopenhauer formula given by us” (V.A.K.).